Track 1  
Hello and welcome to Complete Spanish. We’re really excited about this new material, Language 
Transfe r's first complete course, which is all you need to become a master self -directed language 
learner and steer yourself to fluency through practice of, and exposure to, Spanish; enjoying the 
fascinating journey of delving into language.  
Right after the first hour, you will be and feel like a Spanish speaker. With the thinking method, 
we are not just interested in teaching you Spanish in record time, but also about exploring the thinking 
processes, abilities, and habits which make us effective and confide nt language learners in control of 
our own learning process. This will give you a more intimate relationship with your new language 
and the greater ability to express yourself through the mechanisms that language offers.  
We will reconstruct the langua ge together in a way that will give you all of the know -how to 
overcome your technical difficulties in that language, so that you can concentrate on achieving and 
enjoying a freedom in your new language.  
The course has been recorded with a volunteer s tudent and is a genuine real life learning 
experience. The volunteer student does not have a script, and she’s not acting. Recording in this way 
has allowed us to capture the essence of the learning experience with the thinking method . During the 
length o f the course, I will be asking the volunteer student to perform various mental exercises, 
resulting in the construction of sentences. When I do so, you will pause the audio and complete the 
task yourself, and then continue listening to see how our voluntee r student answered. It is important 
to understand that these are exercises and not tests.  
Do not rush to answer. Take your time to think through your answer at your own pace, building it 
up piece by piece with the instructions you received during the audio, which are as much about the 
language as they are about the mental processes.  
It is very important that you don’t try to memorize anything. Memorization is an extremely 
distracting process, and I need you 100% here with us. If you need help g etting over any anxiety about 
forgetting or the possibility of forgetting, then just remind yourself that you can always repeat the 
course at the end. So relax.It’s also important that you don't write anything down. You will carry around your new la nguage 
in your head, not in a notebook. Some of the content you may forget, and that’s ok. That ’s part of the 
design. Don’t worry about that, and just concentrate on understanding (not memorizing) the 
explanations  and building the sentences we give you .  
Find the time and place to do the audios where you are calm, undisturbed and can concentrate 
solely on your language learning experience. Using headphones should help you to tune out from the 
outside world and concentrate on this experience.  
Try to be well rested when you do the courses. The tired mind makes all kinds of unproductive 
short cuts and careless mistakes. It is of the utmost importance that you don’t just listen to the audios, 
even if you’re listening and understanding the process,  but that you pause every time I ask our 
volunteer student a question and work it out for yourself before hearing her response.  
Otherwise you will not have your own language learning experience  - you will just be witnessing 
somebody else’s. If you do not pause and work out the answer for yourself before continuing, you 
will finish knowing a lot about Spanish but not speaking Spanish.  
Sometimes our student takes one second to reply; sometimes 30 seconds or more. What we’ve 
done in the editing proce ss is to leave a short pause for you to hit the pause button and then embark 
on your own mental journey before replying out loud  and continuing with us.  
The more energy you have, the more information you will naturally assimilate. If you find yoursel f 
tuning out during the explanations due to tiredness, then take a break and go back to it later. It ’s better 
to do little often than a lot all at once. So 20 minutes a day you will find much more effective than a 
few hours crammed in over the weekend. B ut of course you will find your own balance with other 
commitments and how quickly you wish to learn Spanish.  
If it’s been awhile since you’ve had to concentrate, then don’t worry. You will notice your 
concentration span increase very rapidly. And rem ember: think slowly to learn quickly. This isn’t a t 
school where we expect your hand to go up straight away with the correct answer through 
memorization; this is a different process where you are expected to take the time to think your answer 
through and t o appreciate and understand that it’s those very processes of taking that time and thinking 
those answers through which makes us assimilate this new knowledge. You don’t even have to worry 
about memorizing this advice, because it will be revisited many ti mes during the course.Not only are all the courses at Language Transfer available for free download, but we are also an 
unfunded and independent project. This allows us to create the best courses we can create , without 
external monetary or public ity pressures. Now, to maintain this freedom and to continue with the 
many plans we have in the pipeline for more audio courses and also textbooks, we really do need help 
with donations. So if you love the course and are in a position to donate , then pleas e do. Many thanks 
for joining us, and let’s begin.