Track 11  
T: So we saw how our “to" form of the verb : to come, to eat, to tolerate . How would to tolerate  be?  
S: Toleration -toleración -tolerar.   
T: Exactly, tolerar . Good. So our “to” form ends with an r and it's always  going to be -ar, -er or -ir. 
And we had an example of each. And we notice  that for -ar, -ir and -er verbs, unless the verb is 
irregular, we will take off that ending and put on an -o to get the “ I” version, to say I tolerate  for 
example. So how would you say I tolerate ?  
S: Tolero ?  
T: Good. And you moved the accent back as well, which is essential for the present tense. Very good. 
If you said toleró , it would mean he tolerated , which as I mentioned, will be useful for us later 
when we learn this tense. Bu t it's important in the present tense to have the accent on the 
penultimate syllable. Tolero . What was to eat ?  
S: Comer.   
T: And what is I eat?  
S: Comero.   
T: So you don't add on the o, you take off the ending  – and then you put:   
S: Oh yes, como .  
T: Como.  Good. This also means how or like, by coincidence. You might have heard cómo estás? - 
How are you?  But como  is also I eat. So for all verbs, we take of f the ending and we add -o and 
we get the “ I” version. But for the rest of the versions, for he, she, it, you ( formal), for we, etc., the 
verbs split into two groups. Although we have three different endings, we have two groups. Now 
most verbs in Spanish are -ar verbs. This is the biggest group. The group of -ar verbs, the verbs 
that end -ar. In fact any new verb that comes into Spanish will become, will be crowned, as an -ar 
verb. So to give you some examples - tuitear . What do you think that means?  
S: To Twitter .T: To tweet , yes, tuitear . Facebookear , yes this exis ts. Googlear .  
S: Excellent.  
T: So there is something in the mental lexicon, in the mental dictionary that is saying there can be no 
more -er/-ir verbs. These are a historic group, the door is closed. So we have two groups. So for -ar, 
-er, -ir, if the verb is regular we take off the ending  -ar, -er, -ir, and we put -o and we get the “ I” 
version. Now for the others, the other versions, there's a slight difference between -ar verbs and -
er/-ir verbs. Now -ar verbs have the vowel /ah/ as a principl e sound, as a sound that keeps popping 
up. So, for example, to eliminate . How is to eliminate ?  
S: Elimination -eliminación -eliminar .  
T: Good. Eliminar . So if you want to say I eliminate  or I delete , how would it be? Think syllable by 
syllable. If you thin k of it all together it's quite confusing here because you have quite a few vowels.  
S: Elimino ?  
T: Good. You see when you take your time to divide actually the word piece by piece, it's much more 
digestible. Elimino . Good. Now for he, she, it and you (formal) - we have learned that these group 
together in Spanish - we just use an a on the ending. So how would that be? He deletes  or 
eliminates,  she/he/you  (formal).  
S: Elimina.   
T: Good. And we still have the accent on the penultimate syllable, elimina . Very good. How do you 
think you would say to last  like “it lasts a long time" or something like this? It's not obvious 
through the word last, but maybe we find something through Latin that helps us work out how to 
say that: “a period of time”, sometimes  we call it duration , no?  
S: Yes.  
T: So how would that be in Spanish?  
S: Duración.   
T: So to las t might actually come from this. If it did, how would it sound?  
S: Durar.T: Yes. And this is the verb, durar . A lot  is much  in Spanish; it's mucho . So if  you want to say it lasts 
a long time  you can just say it lasts much .  
S: Durar mucho.   
T: This is to last , durar . So how would it lasts  be? So…  
S: Dura mucho.   
T: So you might be talking about a show or movie. How would you say it doesn't last a long tim e?  
S: No dura mucho.   
T: Good. No dura mucho.  How do you say exaggeration ? Exa /juh-juh/, exaggeration ?  
S: Exageración.   
T: Exageración. To exaggerate:   
S: Exagerar.   
T: Yeah. So how would you say I exaggerate ?  
S: Exagero.   
T: He's exaggerating , or she's exaggerating or you-  
S: Exagera.   
T: Good. Exagera.  He's not exaggerating, she's not exaggerating, you ( formal)  are not exaggerating:   
S: No exagera.   
T: Good.  No exagera. Good.  Did you ever hear the word mastication  in English?  
S: Masticación.   
T: D id you ever hear it though?  
S: Yes.  
T: I didn't. I mean this is a word -  
S: It’s chewing .T: Yes. So how do you think to chew  would be?  
S: Masticar.   
T: Masticar  is to chew . Now I didn't know this word actually and this will happen to many English 
speakers as well. You will be able to work out many English words that you didn't know before 
through Spanish. So this was the way round it worked for me. Because I found masticar  first, and 
then I saw in English somewhere mastication . So it can work that way round as well which is 
useful. Another example is morder , which means to bite . I learned this in Spanish, and then I saw 
in some novel I was reading, mordent . Oh ok that means biting . You can increase your English 
vocabulary and what you understand in English just through the Latin that you learn in Spanish. 
So if masticar  is to chew, how would you say I chew ?  
S: Mastico.   
T: Mastico. Good. And he chews or she chews, it chews, you ( formal) chew ?  
S: Mastica.   
T: Mastica. Good. Now this is our key sound , this / a/ sound. Now we can add on different sounds to 
this / a/ to get other versions. So for example, if we add on an n to this / a/, we get they and we get 
you (plural). So in English like you guys , you all . So how would you say collaboration ?  
S: Colabo ración.   
T: Colaboración. To collaborate:   
S: Colaborar.   
T: Good. I collaborate:   
S: Colaboro.   
T: Good. Colaboro.  He/she/it/you ( formal):  
S: Colabora.   
T: Colabora. You can add on to this an n and you get they or you (plural). So how would it be?  
S: Colaboran.T: Colaboran. Good. Hablar  is to speak  in Spanish. Hablar . It's spelled h-a-b-l-a-r. What's 
happening with that h?  
S: It's silent.  
T: Totally silent. Hablar . How do you say I speak ?  
S: Hablo.   
T: So hablo  is I speak or I am speaking . Habla  is-  
S: He/she/it or the formal.  
T: Good. You formal. So what would it mean if I said no hablan con Pablo ?  
S: They're not speaking with Pablo.   
T: Good. They're not speaking with Pablo or they don't speak with Pablo . Good. How would you say 
I want to speak ?  
S: Quiero hablar.   
T: How would you say I'm going to speak ? Think of to go on a voyage.  
S: Ah, voy.  
T: Good .  
S: Yes. Voy hablar.   
T: Now I'm not sure, because hablar  starts with /a/, I'm not sure if you put the a to connect them.  
Did you?  
S: Oh, no I didn't. Voy a hablar.   
T: And when you speak quickly, it will kind of blend together. Voy a hablar.  Maybe it's a fraction 
longer, voy a hablar , but it will stick together like this. Good. Now, if we go back to this he/she/it  
form, habla , and we add an  s, we get the you (informal).  
S: Hablas.T: So this is speaking to one person informally. Hablas . When we have one of these little words: te, 
me, lo, los, la, las, they will come before the changed verb. So the changed verb is the one that 
isn't ending in r anymore. They will come before this verb. So if we have quiero , I want , and we 
want to say I want it,  that it must come before the verb. So how would it be?  
S: Lo quiero.   
T: But that little word can also go after the complete verb. If we say somethi ng like I want to see it,  
we end up actually having an option where we put that it. But it doesn't matter; there's no change 
in meaning. It's exactly the same, you just have the option.  
So what was to see , which was related to English view?  
S: Ver?  
T: So if you want to say I want to see it  or I want to see him?   
S: So it's quiero verlo .  
T: Quiero verlo.   
S: Or lo quiero ver .  
T: Yeah you have the option. Lo quiero ver . But if you have one changed verb all by itself, you don't 
have the option; it must go  before. You might say it's important to speak about it . Now you don't 
need to say about  in Spanish, we're going to say to speak it  and that's understood to speak about 
it. So here, in that clause and that bit, to speak about it is only to speak . So h ow would you say it's 
important to speak about it  or literally, it's important to speak it?   
S: Es importante hablarlo.   
T: Good. So how was I must or I owe, which is related to the English word debt?  
S: Debo.   
T: So I must invite him:   
S: Debo invita rlo.  
T: Or?S: Lo debo invitar.   
T: Good. So that's the deal with these little words, where we can put them. Good.