Track 12  
T: So, we're looking at -ar verbs and how they work, and we are changing them for the different 
people. Let's make a recap . How would you say to contaminate ?  
S: Contaminar.   
T: Good. So how would you say it's contaminating ?  
S: Contamina.   
T: Good. So our key vowel for -ar verbs is / a/. That's our key vowel. We add a n to get you guys or 
they contaminate . So how would that b e?  
S: Contaminan.   
T: And we add an s to the he/she/it form to get the you (informal). So you (informal) contaminate  
would be :  
S: Contaminas.   
T: Now for -er/-ir verbs, for -er/-ir verbs, their key sound is / e/. For this closed group of historic 
verbs,  their key sound is / e/. So, what do you think vender  means? Vender . What do you think 
that means?  
S: Does it have anything to do with vent and ventilation ?  
T: No it's not a t, it's a d.  
S: Oh vending . Vending machine ?  
T: Yeah. Good. So what does it  mean then, vender ? What does a vending machine do? It's a selling 
machine. Or you might have heard street vender  as well. So I sell  or I'm selling:   
S: Vendo.   
T: I'm selling it:   
S: Lo vendo ?  
T: Good. Is there anywhere else you can put that lo? Do you  have the option here?S: Well, we can put it at the end if it's in its vender  state.  
T: Exactly. So no, we can't put it anywhere else. It has to go there. Lo vendo . How would you say 
I'm selling them ?  
S: Lo vendas.   
T: It's very important when you’re m aking -  
S: Véndolo. Las . Oh. Sorry.  
T: It's very important  when you're building the sentence that you take your time to understand who's 
doing what. Ah? So I sell , it’s me doing the selling. So  I'm selling them , the first bit you want to 
work out is  I'm selling . What's that?  
S: Vendo.   
T: Good. And then you want to work out them . I sell  is vendo . I sell them  is?  
S: Los vendo.   
T: Los vendo.  Good. So this process of dividing it into two thoughts, just doing that is going to make 
sure that you don't kind of get this salad. Many times, you will just switch them, and you want to 
say she has them  but you will say they have her . You know, so it's very important to take your 
time to think about those bits separately. If you're talking about feminine t hings like I sell the 
houses , how would it be? So it's still them  we're going to say, but we mean feminine things. I sell 
them:   
S: Las vendo.   
T: Very good. Las vendo.  If you want to say actually I sell  or I am selling the houses , the word for 
the, we sai d was la. La casa also becomes plural.  
S: Las.  
T: Yes. And the word casa also becomes plural.  
S: Casas.   
T: So I am selling the houses:S: Vendo las casas ?  
T: Yeah. I'm selling the houses , vendo las casas , or I'm selling them and you mean the hou ses:  
S: Las vendo.   
T: Las vendo. Good. The reason why we're looking at this with objects is because many people, when 
they're learning Spanish, they remember to change gender for people , but they kind of put all things 
in with lo and los and we kind of w ant to get out of that habit before it starts. So we imagine the 
houses, we refer to them as las.  
S: Is there a rule for which objects are female and which are not?  
T: Well remember it's not strictly the object that has the gender, but the word, the noun  in itself. So 
feminine words end in a. Words that end in a, with a few exceptions, are feminine words. So casa 
is feminine: la casa . And it takes la. Then there are other feminine endings. So -ión is a feminine 
ending. The administration is la administrac ión. All of these words are going to be la.  
The opinion  is?  
S: La opinión .  
T: La opinión . The association:   
S: La asociación .  
T: Good. The celebration:   
S: La celebración.   
T: La celebración. Good. If a word ends in -ity in Engl ish, it's going to be -idad  in Spanish most of 
the time. This -idad  is a feminine ending as well. So that shows us that all of these words are 
feminine words. So for example you have diversity . You change that -ity to -idad . -idad .  
S: Diversidad.   
T: Good . Diversidad . The diversity:   
S: La diversidad.   
T: La diversidad.  Good. The nationality:S: La nacionalidad.   
T: La nacionalidad. The same happens with the -tion, it becomes like an s or a /th/ in most of Spain. 
La na/s/ionalidad, la na/th/ionalidad, you  could hear either. The creativity:   
S: La creatividad.   
T: Very well pronounced. You thought of the vowels very well. La creatividad . The electricity :  
S: La electricidad.   
T: La electricidad. These words are very nice as well for guessing other words. Be cause if you have 
this rule, electricity  becomes electricidad , you can assume that electric  is probably the same in 
Spanish as well, just sounding more Spanish or having a small change. Even though there's no rule 
for that, you can assume it. So how do you  think you would say electric?  
S: ElecTRIC .  
T: Does it sound Spanish enough yet?  
S: ElecTRIco .  
T: Yeah eLECtrico .  
S: Eléctrico .  
T: Eléctrico . How would you say generosity ?  
S: Generosidad.   
T: Very good . Gener osidad. How do you think you will say generous ? Have a play with it.  
S: Gener …  
T: Have a play with it and see what sits nice.  
S: Generoso.   
T: Yes. Generoso.  Generoso. For males. For females what do you think it would become?  
S: Generosa.T: Generosa.  Exactly. How lo becomes la, generoso  becomes generosa . It also can become plural 
as well if we’re talking about more than one person, male or mixed group, how would it sound?  
S: Generosos.   
T: Good. And if I was just speaking about females?  
S: Generosas .  
T: Very good. Community:   
S: Comunidad.   
T: The community:   
S: La comunidad.   
T: La comunidad. Feminine word , feminine ending. How do you think you would say common ?  
Common  comes from community , by the way.  
S: Is it cómono ? Comono .  
T: Común.   
S: Ah.  
T: So there’s no way to know that.  
S: Comuno  or Común ?  
T: Común.   
S: Común.   
T: Común , with the accent on the end. So there's no way to know that. You will get -  
S: It's irregular?  
T: There's no rule here so there's no irregularity. So maybe y ou will take comuno  and somebody 
would give you that feedback of común . And then you would realize. But if you didn't take that 
guess, you wouldn't get the word. We will learn a lot of vocabulary very quickly this way.How would you say opportunity ?  
S: Oportunidad.   
T: Oportunidad.  How do you think you would say opportune ? Opportune , you know we use this 
word in English like timely  or convenient . Opportune:   
S: Oportuna ?  
T: Oportuno.  Or if you are talking about a feminine thing, oportuna . Clarity:   
S: Claridad.   
T: Claridad. And clear  comes from clarity . So you can look at claridad  and you can probably guess 
how to say clear .  
S: Clear ?  
T: But look at the Spanish word. Claridad.   
S: Clarido.   
T: And the -idad  is the ending isn't it?  
S: Oh yes, claro .  
T: Yes, claro . So this is another good skill. When you're guessing, you want to get rid of the ending. 
This ending -idad  is what's making it a noun. La claridad . Claro . And claro  is used a lot 
conversationally. Other than meaning “clear” as an adjectiv e, it can also be used like “of course". 
Claro, claro, claro.  You will hear this a lot in conversation to show agreement or understanding 
of what you've said. Claro.  Personality:   
S: Personalidad.   
T: Personalidad. So we can assume that person  is probably the same in Spanish as well. When I say 
“the same", I mean similar.  
S: So again it's guessing. It could be -T: Exactly. So what do you think it sounds like? You will develop an intuition, especially through 
listening. This is why listening is important a s well because this is what will really develop your 
intuition. Because you might have heard it before and not realized it.  
S: I've heard of persona , so I'm guessing it's persono .  
T: It's persona .  
S: Oh persona.   
T: It's persona . It's a feminine word. S o remember it's the word that's feminine or masculine, not the 
thing. So I am a persona , even though I am a man. The word is feminine, not me. Sincerity:   
S: Sinceridad.   
T: Sinceridad. Sincere:   
S: Sencero.   
T: Sincero.   
S: Sincero.   
T: Sincero. So that's  another example of a feminine ending. If it ends -idad , it's a feminine ending. 
All of these words without exception are la. If it ends -ión, that's a feminine ending. All of these 
words without exception s go with la. Back to vender . How was I sell ?  
S: Vendo.   
T: I want to sell:   
S: Quiero vender.   
T: Quiero vender.  Good. I want to sell it:   
S: Quiero venderlo.   
T: Quiero venderlo.  Where else could we put that lo?  
S: Lo quiero vender.T: Good. The -er/-ir verbs use as their principal sound /e/. So whilst -ar verbs use the principle sound 
/a/, and we got organizar  and then organiza , for - what does that mean, organiza ?  
S: He/she  or it or you (formal).  
T: Good. So organiza , /a/ is a principal sound. Organizan  means? When we ad d an n what does it 
mean?  
S: They.   
T: They organize . Or?  
S: You ( plural).  
T: You ( plural). So we add the n and we get they and you guys. Organizan . We add the s and we get 
you (informal), organizas . So /a/ is our key sound for -ar verbs, and for -er/-ir verbs, our key 
sound is /e/. So to get he/she/it and you formal, we'll take off our ending and put on /e/. He sells, 
she sells, it sells, you  (formal) sell:  
S: Vende.   
T: Vende. How would you say he sells it  or she sells it ?  
S: Lo vende.   
T: Good. Lo v ende. Lo vende. We said that the word for something was algo, algo. So you can say 
he's selling something , she's selling something , you're selling something .  
S: Vende algo.   
T: Good. Vende algo. Good. What do you think we would add on to vende  to get the they form or 
the you (plural) form?  
S: Venden.   
T: So we're doing actually the same. So we have a key vowel sound, which is /e/. But then the rest, 
we're doing the same what we did with the -ar verbs. Venden . They sell . They're not selling:   
S: No venden.   
T: They're not selling it:S: No lo venden.   
T: Why aren't they selling it?:   
S: ¿Por qué no lo venden?   
T: Good. ¿Por qué no lo venden?  Why aren't they selling it to me ?, you just say why aren't they 
selling me it ? You put the personal one, me, first. The one that refers to the person it goes first.  
You just say why aren't they selling me it ? So they are selling . How is they are selling ?  
S: Venden.   
T: Venden. They are selling it:   
S: Lo venden.   
T: Good. They are selling me it.  So they c ome together and the personal one comes first.  
S: Me lo venden.   
T: Me lo venden. So whilst we have this complicated stuff happening in English, they sell it to me , 
no, in Spanish we're just going to identify it's it and it's me, me is the personal one so  it's going to 
come first, me lo venden.  They're selling it to me.  They're not selling it to me , or they don't sell it 
to me:   
S: No me lo venden.   
T: No me lo venden. Why don't they sell it to me?   
S: ¿Por qué no me lo venden?   
T: Very good. The word for us is nos. Nos, the word for us. So how would you say they are selling 
us something ? So something , you know algo, is not one of these little words like me, lo, nos. It's 
going to come afterwards. So  they are selling us something:   
S: Nos venden algo.   
T: V ery good. Nos venden algo. But if instead of saying they're selling us something and you just 
wanted to say they're selling us it , they're selling it to us, they're selling us it.  How would it be?S: Nos lo venden.   
T: Good. Nos lo venden. Good. So there you have an us, you have an it, you have a they. It could be 
like hugely complicated, no, if you just took that all as a package and tried to translate it. But 
thinking about the verb first and then you’re thinking about the other bits you need to put, the n 
you get the sentence that you want, confident that you have the sentence that you want. How would 
you say they're not selling it to us ?  
S: No nos lo venden.   
T: Good. No nos lo venden. Why don't they sell it to us?   
S: ¿Por qué no nos lo venden?   
T: Good. ¿Por qué no nos lo venden?  Very good.