Track 14  
T: What was to know ?  
S: Saber.   
T: Saber. Good. What would I kno w be, if it follows our rules?  
S: Sabo.   
T: But it’s not. It’s sé. So it’s an exception. S-e, sé. You might have heard lo sé, lo sé - literally I know 
it. Because sé by itself is a bit short , so you often hear people saying lo sé, lo sé  - I know it , rather 
than sé, sé, sé . So this is irregular, very irregular. S-e. But the rest of the versions of saber  are 
regular. So how would you say he knows or she knows or it knows or you (formal) know ?  
S: Sabe.   
T: Good. So I don't know :  
S: No sé.   
T: No sé. We said that quiero  was I want , and quiero  actually is an -er verb so how would you say I 
don't know what he wants ? What is what ?  
S: Qué. No sé qué lo quiere.   
T: Why lo?  
S: He.  
T: Firstly, you're not using the word for he, you're just saying he wa nts and that's contained in the 
verb. But lo is not he, it's him. Not he. We didn't learn yet the word for he. On purpose actually we 
haven't been learning these words so that we can just use the verb for now.  
S: Ok .  
T: So try again: I don't know what he  wants.   
S: No sé qué quiere .T: Good, you must feel comfortable with two words becoming one. I don't know what he wants , no 
sé qué quiere . Good. The word for he is él, él. E-l. If you want to be emphatic: I don't know what 
HE wants, or if yo u want to show or clarify who you're talking about, you can add that. So how 
would you do that? I don't know what he wants :  
S: No sé qué él quiere.   
T: Good. No sé qué él quiere. Or you can say no sé qué quiere él . You can do either; one sou nds 
more emphatic than the other , and this is much better understood in live practice. Because the 
emphasis is n't just in the sentence, it's with the hands and facial expression and tone of voice. So 
it's something much better to get live. No sé qué él quiere, no sé qué quiere él.   
The word for she, what is the word for her first? We want to differentiate. What is the word for 
her, like in I want to see her ? How would you say I want to see, to view, her ?  
S: Quiero verla.   
T: Good. Quiero verla. But if you want to say she sees , it's not her, I want to see her , it's she. And 
the word for she is ella. Ella.  
S: Ella.   
T: Now this is spelled e-l-l-a. Double l in Spanish is pronounced /yuh/. Ella. So if you want to say 
she sees, to see is a verb, what type of verb is it? -ar verb, -ir verb, -er verb?  
S: Ver. It's an -er.  
T: An -er verb. It seems to o obvious to us.  
S: Sorry I thought you might be asking something more complicated.  
T: No. This is an -er verb. So how do I say she sees ?  
S: Ella ve.   
T: Ella ve. And if I know who I'm talking about I can just say ve. Maybe when we are contrasting in 
the sentence we have a special desire to use these words. When I say contrasting, I mean in the 
sense maybe I say I want to invite him, but s he doesn't want to invite him . So even if we know who 
I'm talking about, there I will probably use the word for she because I'm making that contrast.Again these are things you just do very naturally without realizing it once you get practicing. Also 
becau se your native language probably does the same thing as well. Even if you don't have the 
choice whether or not to put she - like in English  you always put it - you will stress it with your 
voice. I don't want to invite him , but SHE does. So because y ou are stressing that with your voice 
in English, that's also going to carry over. Many things are going to carry over that are positive 
language transfer that we might not necessarily address specifically. So how would you say that? 
I don't want to invite  him, but she does want to invite him. So, I don't want:   
S: No quiero.   
T: To invite him :  
S: Invitarlo.   
T: Good. No quiero invitarlo. But:  
S: Pero.   
T: Pero.  She does . So actually we can just say but she yes . What was the word for yes?  
S: Sí.  
T: Sí. So we can just say but she yes . How would you do that?  
S: Pero ella sí.   
T: Good. No quiero invitarlo, pero ella sí.  Or maybe I even use the word for I there to be emphatic. 
Yo no quiero invitarlo.  Yo: y-o. Yo no quiero invitarlo, pero ella sí.   
So we sai d that salir was to leave or to go out . Now, I leave or I go out is salgo . It's irregular, has 
the /g/ sound popping up. Salgo . But the rest of the versions are regular , so let's make them. How 
do you say he goes out or he leaves ?  
S: Sele?  
T: Again you'r e making some Turkish vowel harmony here.  
S: Sorry, what's the to?  
T: Salir .S: So it's seli- No  
T: Salir.   
S: Sale.   
T: Sale. Good. So that sele you put before is because it just sounds better. The mind has some kind 
of desire for this vowel harmony. It's very interesting. Sale.  Now you can make me the rest.  
They , or you (plural), you guys:    
S: Salen.   
T: And you (informal):  
S: Sales.   
T: Sales. Good. Now if you want to say I'm going out to eat , how is I'm going out again? So it should 
be salo but it was:  
S: Sango ?  
T: Salgo.   
S: Salgo.   
T: Salgo.  So the irregularity is the same as the other ones that we saw: tener , tengo : to have, I have ; 
venir,  vengo : to come , I come ; salir , salgo . So how do you say I'm going out to eat ?  
S: I'm not sure of the word out.  
T: This is the verb. The verb is  to leave or to go out .  
S: Oh, salgo . Right .  
T: So you don't need the word for out.  
S: Ok. Salgo comer. Salgo a comer.   
T: Why did you think of the a? I think you felt it. You felt that sense of movement . Good. So salgo a 
comer , it's a verb of movement. Good. Voy a comer , I'm going to eat . Salgo a comer , I'm going 
out to eat . Very good. What was I have ?S: Tengo.   
T: Tengo. I have it :  
S: Lo tengo.   
T: Lo tengo. Good. I have them :  
S: Los tengo.   
T: Los tengo. Good. If we add on que to tengo , and there's not really any comfortable translation for 
this, but if we add on que we get I have to , in the sense of must , have to . So for example if you say 
tengo que comer  you get I have to eat . So we change the mea ning of tengo : like  have , which is 
just possession, to have to  by adding que. Like I said there is no comfortable translation. Que is 
what  or that, it's also used as that. We're going to use it like this later, but again it's still very 
uncomfortable to t ranslate. So we will just say we add que and we get the meaning of have to . So 
how would you say I have to do it ? What was to do ? Begins with a silent h:  
S: Hacer.   
T: Hacer. So I have to do it :  
S: Tengo que hacer. Hacerlo.   
T: Good. Tengo que hacerlo , lo tengo que hacer , you have the option. So we've seen a few verbs 
with this -go business. Vengo , I'm coming ; tengo , I have ; salgo , I leave ; and we've seen that the -go 
just pops up for the “I” version. It doesn't pop up for the other versio ns, this g. So, tiene  for 
example is he has . Tiene . How would you say they have ?  
S: Tienen.   
T: Tienen. And how would you say you have , speaking informally?  
S: Tienes.   
T: Tienes. Good. So if I give you the version for he comes  it's viene . So how would you say you 
come ?  
S: Informal?T: Yes.  
S: Vienes.   
T: Vienes. The word for when  is cuándo . Cuándo .  
S: Cuándo .  
T: When are you coming? :  
S: Informal, vienes.   
T: It's the English that's confusing you.  
S: ¿Cuándo vienes?   
T: Exactly. So don 't let that English are you coming  confuse you. There's a lot we're doing in English 
there that we don't need to worry about for Spanish. ¿Cuándo vienes?  When are you coming to 
eat?:  
S: ¿Cuándo vienes a comer?   
T: A comer , very nice. ¿Cuándo viene s a comer? When are you coming to eat?  Tiene , what does 
tiene  mean?  
S: Have .  
T: But I need you to be more specific. I'm giving you more information then just have . Tiene :  
S: He/it/she  or formal you.  
T: Very good. Ella tiene. Ella tiene:   
S: She has.   
T: Good. Quiero saber qué tiene.   
S: I want to know what you have .  
T: What you have,  or she, or it. Very good. We said that a very interesting detail about tener  is that 
you can also translate it as -tain, when this -tain forms part of another verb in  English. So contain  
becomes contener . So how was it has or she has ? He has ?S: Tiene.   
T: Yes. We saw that it was tiene . We haven't looked at why yet, but we've seen that it's a little bit 
irregular. In Spanish you can generalize this irregularity. How i s I have ?  
S: Tengo.   
T: Tengo. I obtain :  
S: Obtengo.   
T: Obtengo. Sounds rather formal in English, but in Spanish you might use it like get. I get it , lo 
obtengo . I obtain it . To put in Spanish is poner . Poner .  
S: Poner .  
T: That means to put . And I put  you have the same business with this g popping up, so how do you 
think it sounds, I put?  
S: Pongo.   
T: Pongo. And poner  is interesting like tener , because when we have -pose inside of a verb in English 
we can turn that -pose into poner , and we get the ve rb in Spanish. So the example would be 
compose  becomes componer . So to compose  is componer . How would to suppose  be?  
S: Suposer.   
T: So compose  is componer . Suppose  is:  
S: Suponer.   
T: Suponer. And how do you think you would say I suppose ? We want to gen eralize our irregularities 
in Spanish. So how was I put ? How was that? I put:  
S: Pongo.   
T: Pongo. So suponer , to suppose,  becomes, for I suppose :  
S: Supongo.T: Yeah. Supongo. And you will hear supongo que sí , I suppose that yes . I said that que can al so 
mean that. I suppose so , we say in English. In Spanish you say I suppose that yes . Supongo que 
sí. You will hear that. So we had componer , to compose ; suponer , to suppose . How would you 
say to impose ?  
S: Imponer.   
T: Imponer. To expose :  
S: Exponer.   
T: To oppose :  
S: Oponer.   
T: Yes. I oppose it.  I oppose it :  
S: Lo opongo.   
T: Lo opongo. I oppose it.  Good. And I have :  
S: Tengo.   
T: Tengo. And we said we can add on que to get the meaning of have to . So if you want to say I have 
to see her , how  would you say I have to see her ?  
S: Tengo que verla.   
T: Good. We can say la tengo que ver or tengo que verla. Both are fine. How would you say I must 
see her , I owe to see her ?  
S: Debo verla.   
T: Debo verla. Or where else would you put that la?  
S: La debo ver.   
T: Good. La debo ver. The difference between tengo que and debo is exactly like English. We use 
must  when it's a bit more serious: I must see her . And we say have to  like an everyday kind of 
thing. The way you use it in English and Spanish is exactly the same. So debo  is a little bit moresevere, a little bit more serious, and tener que , to have to with que, is more everyday. Tengo que 
comer ahora . What does that mean? Tengo que comer ahora :  
S: I have to eat now.   
T: Good. I have to eat now. What does it mean if I say voy a intentar comer más tarde ? Voy a  
intentar comer más tarde :  
S: Voy is I'm going .  
T: Yes.  
S: Intentar ? Can you say the whole sentence again?  
T: Voy a intentar comer más tarde.   
S: It sounds odd, because it sounds like I'm going with the intention to eat later.  
T: Good, but it's not a noun. It's not the intention. It's not la intención , it's intentar . And when you 
hear that -ar on the end, you can suspect that it's a verb. Most of the time it's going to be. So you 
want to something. Voy a intentar :  
S: I'm going to intend -  
T: I'm going to try.   
S: Ah.  
T: I'm going to try:  
S: To eat later.   
T: Exactly. I'm going to try to eat later. Good. So let's make a  very short recap on these useful verbs 
that tend to have verbs comin g after them in this way, like voy a . So we had voy a : I'm going to. I 
can?  It might help to know that the word power  is related to this word in Spanish. Of course when 
you can, when you're able to, you have the power  to. So it's related and it begins with  p. I can :  
S: Puedo.   
T: Puedo. Good. Voy a comer : I'm going to eat. Puedo comer  - what does that mean?S: I can eat.   
T: Yes. Tengo que comer :  
S: I have to eat.   
T: Debo comer :  
S: I must eat.   
T: Quiero comer :  
S: I want to eat.   
T: Good. So these ver bs: quiero , voy a, tengo  que, puedo , debo , they're very useful because we can 
just put the “to ” form after.