Track 15  
T: What was the word for what ?  
S: Qué.   
T: And do you remember how was to pass ?  
S: Pasar.   
T: Pasar. And this can also mean like to happen . To pass  in the sense of to occur . How do you say 
he passes ?  
S: Pasa.   
T: Good. And she passes :  
S: Pasa.   
T: And it passes :  
S: Pasa.   
T: Good. And if you want to say what passes , meaning what happens , what's going on, what is 
happening ?:  
S: I remembered it now. I went through the whole process and I remember people saying ¿qué pasó ?  
T: This is the past. We said that when you emphasize that -o on the end it's actually the version for 
he/she/it  in the past, so ¿qué pasó ? is what happened ?, and we will look at this later. But what is 
what's happening ? What is happening ?:  
S: ¿Qué pasa ?  
T: Good. So if you want to say I want to know what's going on, I want to know what's happening, I 
want to know what's passing :  
S: Quiero saber qué pasa.   
T: Quiero saber qué pasa. I want to know what's happening.  Good. There's one more thing we need 
to know about the present, and it's gonna fill in, happily, a grey area for us which you might bewondering already: how did we get tiene  he/she/it/you (formal)  has or have , and then the other 
versions tienen , tienes , from tener ? To want  is querer . What is I want ?  
S: Quiero.   
T: Quiero. So how does querer  become quiero ? So there's something else we need to know about 
the present to understand this, and then we c an manage the present completely. So what's 
happening is that when we have an e in the “to” form of the verb like in tener : to have , like in 
querer : to want ; when we have an e inside of the verb it's part of the root, not part of the ending. 
Not that -er, that doesn't count. But the /e/ in ten- and the /e/ in quer- of querer . When we stress 
it, when we emphasize it, it often splits; most of the time, it splits into an ie under the stress of that 
accent, under the stress when we say querer  we have the accent  on the end, we have the accent on 
the ending. Then when we take off that -er we put -o, we would have quero  but when we stress 
down that e it splits and it becomes quiero . The same for tener : we would have tene for he has , 
but when we stress down on t hat e it splits and it becomes tiene . The same for come . We have 
venir . But when we say he comes, she comes, it comes , you (formal) come , it would be vene , but 
it becomes viene . Now it's not happening with tengo , vengo , because we can say the n and the g 
kind of hold it up. So this is probably why it got saved. But otherwise it splits. Now, this might 
seem quite an abstract thing to get your head around, but what is very helpful is that we have these 
between words in English and Spanish. We can identify the se between words in English and  
Spanish. For example, we have a word that we use for time in English, but only in music. Do you 
know what is this word? A word we use for time but only in music. When you speak about the 
time, the rhythm of music, you talk about its:  
S: Beat.  
T: Not beat but tempo . Now, time in Spanish is tiempo . You see the difference between tempo  and 
tiempo , other than the Spanish pronunciation, is that the e has split into ie. So you can even see it 
between words in English and Sp anish. Concert  in Spanish is - try and do the same thing.  
S: Concierto.   
T: Concierto. Good. You stuck in an o to make it sound more Spanish and you split that e. Concierto . 
November  is Noviembre . So this will help us remember. So this happens most of the  time. We 
already saw places that it doesn't happen; we saw very briefly the verb llegar , which was to arriveand we said llego , I arrive . We saw esperar , which was to wait or to hope , espero . It's not 
happening. But most of the time it's going to happen. We saw it happening with tener  which 
became tiene , he/she/it/you (formal), tienen , they or you (plural), tienes,  you (informal).  
We saw it happening with venir , to come : viene , vienes , vienen . Another verb that we see this 
way is pensar . what do you thi nk pensar  means?  
S: Thoughtful .  
T: But it is a verb. There is no verb to thoughtful , is there?  
S: Well, to think .  
T: Yes that's it,  to think . It's very useful for us to group words into families. So “verb” is a family. So 
when you decide what type of w ord it is, then you narrow down the possible behaviors of that 
word, and you manage to manage it much easier. And making that very clearly - that connection - 
is really really helpful for you. To think , pensar . So if you say I think , how is it going to be?   
S: Pienso.   
T: Good. It would be penso  but you stress down on that e and it splits into ie and you get pienso .  
How is he thinks or she thinks or it thinks or you (formal)?  
S: Piense.   
T: This sounds like vowel harmony. I mean it sounds nice, piense , because we have ie and then we 
want to put an e next to it because it matches. But that's Turkish grammar. You must know where 
you are with any verb. And to know where you are you must go back to the “to" form. Then you 
are confident.  
S: So it's piensar .  
T: Pensar.   
S: Pensar , not penser .  
T: No, pensar . So you must go back there and then you feel confident. Otherwise the base is going 
to effect what vowel you want to put on.S: Piensa.   
T: Piensa. You (informal):  
S: Piensas.   
T: Good. What do you think? :  
S: ¿Qué piensas ?  
T: Yeah. ¿Qué piensas ? This is a useful verb as well actually. Because if you say I think to eat  it 
means I plan on eating . You can say I think to eat , that simple. I think to eat : how would it sound?  
S: Pienso comer.   
T: Pienso co mer. I think to eat  later is I plan on eating later . So how would you say I plan on eating 
later ?  
S: Pienso comer tarde.   
T: That means I plan on eating late , which is fine, but later  is more late . And more  is related to 
massive .  
S: Más tarde.   
T: Good. Pienso comer más tarde. I plan on eating later. So you can use it like that as well. We saw 
venir  also splits with the exception of vengo . He comes, she comes, you (formal) - how would that 
be?  
S: Viene.   
T: Viene. They :  
S: Vienen.   
T: Vienen. You (informal):  
S: Vienes.   
T: Good. Do you remember how was when ?  
S: Cúando .T: Cúando . When are you coming ?:  
S: ¿Cuándo vienes ?  
T: ¿Cuándo vienes ? Entender  means to understand . You can use comprender  if you forget it, but 
entender  is bet ter. It's more common. But comprender  is easier because it sounds like 
comprehend , and also in comprender  the e doesn't split. I understand is comprendo . But with 
entender  it does split. So you can use comprender,  but most common in Spanish is entender  for 
understand. And here the e does split. So how would you say I understand ?  
S: Entiendo.   
T: Entiendo. How would you say he understands ?  
S: Entiende.   
T: Entiende. Good. They :  
S: Entienden.   
T: Entienden. Perder  means to lose . It's kind of related to perish, there is a connection there, or 
perishable food. You know, food that rots, or real food. Perder , to lose. I lose :  
S: Pierdo.   
T: Pierdo. Good. The process is perder -perdo , maybe it splits: pierdo . Good. I lose it :  
S: Lo pierdo.   
T: Lo pierdo. Good. I lose them :  
S: Los pierdo.   
T: Los pierdo. Good.