Track 16  
T: Comenzar , what do you think that means? Comenzar :  
S: To commence.   
T: To commence. Or?  
S: To start.   
T: To start.  Again this exists and you can use it and it’s probably easier becau se it sounds like 
commence so it’s easier to remember. But there’s another verb which is more common, which is 
empezar . Empezar  This is a z so that’s going to sound / th/ in Spain, empe /th/ar in most of Spain.  
Empezar .  
S: Empezar.   
T: Practice with this one for now. This is to start . How do you say I start ?  
S: Empezo.   
T: Good that's what it should be, but what might happen?  
S: Empiezo.   
T: Empiezo. He starts:   
S: Empieze.   
T: What must you do before you make that decision? What must you do? You must go  back to the 
“to" form. It's a very important habit.  
S: It’s empezar . Empeza.   
T: Good. And then what might be the next step after empeza ?  
S: Empieza.   
T: Empieza. So this is the process we want to take. It's essential for us to get into that habit of go ing 
back to the “to" form and then we know where we are. Otherwise it's guesswork. Empieza: 
empezar -empieza. They start :S: Empiezan.   
T: Empiezan. Good. You (informal ):  
S: Empiezas.   
T: Good. When are you starting? :  
S: ¿Cuándo empiezas?   
T: ¿Cuándo emp iezas? Very good. So the e can split to ie; that's something we need to know about 
the present and it's something we need to be on top of. Now it's in the present that this happens 
because, as we know, one of the fundamental elements of the present tense i s to have that accent 
on the penultimate syllable. So it's having that accent on the penultimate syllable that makes that 
e vulnerable to splitting. The e might split to ie, or the o might split to ue. We know this already 
actually because we have puedo , and this is a split o. To be able , or “to can”, of course there is no 
“to can" in English, to be able we say is poder . Here actually you can see closer that connection 
with power . Before, I said that the word is related to the word power  in English.  El poder - el is 
the masculine the - we also saw it's the word for he, it's also the word for the for masculine words. 
El poder is the power . So here it's a noun. It looks like a verb, but if it has the in front of it, we 
know it's a noun. El poder  - the power . Poder  - to be able . When you take off your ending and 
you change it for present tense, and you stress that o, it splits into ue, and you get puedo . Again 
we can see the same phenomenon happening between words in English and Spanish. So, for 
example,  we have the word port in English, but we say Puerto Rico . Puerto Rico means “the rich 
port". Rico  means rich or nice or tasty  or sweet . So port becomes puerto . We see the o is splitting 
into ue. We have the word force  in English, in Spanish this is fuerza . We have the word school,  
in Spanish this is escuela . We have corp in like corporate , which means body . If Corp  means body  
in corporate , how do you think it is in Spanish?  
S: Cuerpo.   
T: Cuerpo. Good. We have innovative , and this nov in innovative  means new. When you do 
something innovative, you do something new. And the word for new in Spanish is nuevo . So you 
saw the o splitting there. You might have heard pueblo  before. Pueblo  means a village  or a people . 
Population  in Spanish is one of these exc eptions. It's not populación , it's población . And you cansee the connection between población  and pueblo , which means village  or people . A people . You 
can see the o in pob- splitting into ue in pueblo . Mortgage , by the way, actually means “death  
pact". You have mort -, which is the Latin root for death , and -gage , which means pact. The word 
for dead  in Spanish is - have a guess.  
S: Muerto  or muerte .  
T: Well actually, here, one you have the noun, la muerte is the death . So the noun is the w ord you 
put the in front of. In school they tell you that it's the thing, the object. But this is not an object. 
We would think of it, we put the in front of it, it's a noun. La muerte . But then the adjective, which 
is describing, it's muerto  or muerta . Or muertos  or muertas . So you can see in those words 
between English and Spanish this phenomenon of this o splitting into ue when it takes the stress. 
So this is useful for us for present tense. We need to know this for present tense because if we have 
a ver b like dormir , for example, that has an o in the root, when we stress it, it might split. What 
do you think dormir  means?  
S: Staying still  or dormant ?  
T: Yeah, what does dormant  mean? A dormant volcano. It actually means it's a sleeping volcano. Or 
dormi tory, this is a nice connection to make as well. So dormir  means to sleep . How do you say 
I sleep ?  
S: Duermo.   
T: Duermo. Good. In Spanish if you want to say I fall asleep , you can say I sleep myself . So how 
would that sound?  
S: Me duermo.   
T: Me duermo.  Which means I fall asleep , rather than duermo , I sleep . So you can say I'm falling 
asleep , me duermo . It's so boring, me duermo . He sleeps :  
S: Duerme.   
T: Duerme. Good. They sleep :  
S: Duermen.T: Duermen. What do you think encontrar  means? Encontrar :  
S: To encounter.   
T: Good. Which probably means:  
S: To meet.   
T: Oh it does, it means that as well, but there's a more usual meaning as well.  
S: To find ?  
T: Yes. So I'm finding it or I find it , how would you say that?  
S: Lo, is it encuentro ?  
T: Yes it  is.  
S: Lo encuentro.   
T: Good. Something useful to bear in mind is that different versions of the verb, either the “to" form 
or some other version, might be the noun. So you mustn’t assume always that it's a verb. If you 
see un encuentro  - an encounter  - this is now a noun. An encounter . Whatever we can put a or the 
in front of is a noun. So , many times some version of the verb will be the noun. Un encuentro is 
an encounter but encuentro , I encounter .  
Demostrar  was to demonstrate , and if we get rid of th is de-, we get mostrar  which means to show .  
Mostrar . So how would you say: I show ?  
S: Mostro .  
T: It would be mostro -  
S: Muestro ?  
T: Muestro. Good. He shows :  
S: Muestre , wait. Mostrar . Muestra .T: Good. Muestra. We don't need to roll the r here becau se it's just one r. Muestra . Good. And una 
muestra actually is a sample. So there is a noun there that shares that version. Muestra : he shows, 
it shows, she shows, you (formal) show . But una muestra is a sample . They show :  
S: Muestran.   
T: Muestran. Good.