Track 18  
T: So for -ar verbs, we have -amos  in the present for we. Now for -er verbs, we have -emos  for the 
we, and for -ir verbs we have -imos . This is the only time in the whole language that we find a 
difference betw een -er and -ir verbs. They're one group, but here - and it's the only time in the 
entire language - we have a difference between the two of them; in the present for we. For -ir verbs 
we have -imos  and for -er verbs we have -emos . So preferir . What do you think that means, 
preferir ?  
S: Prefer.   
T: Good. To prefer.  To prefer.  We want to think with the “to" whenever the verb ends in an r it's 
going to help us just to think of that as “to”. To prefer . Preferir.  So how would you say: I prefer ?  
S: Prefer o.  
T: Good. It should be prefero.   
S: Prefiero.   
T: Prefiero. It splits. Prefiero. He prefers :  
S: Prefiere.   
T: Prefiere. They  or you (plural):  
S: Prefieren.   
T: Good. How would you say we prefer  (and preferir  has an -ir ending )?  
S: Preferimos.   
T: Preferimos. So there the -er doesn't split, and also the i of -ir is appearing in the endings for the 
first time in the present tense. Preferimos . Good.  
What was to come ? It had something to do with convenient , when things “with -come".  
S: Venir.   
T: Venir. And how would you say: we come  or we're coming ?S: Venimos.   
T: Venimos. Good. To live  in Spanish is vivir . V-i-v-i-r.  
S: Vivir.   
T: You might know this from viva la revolución , you might have heard that somewhere. Long live 
the revolution : viva la revolución . Or you might have even heard viva Las Vegas : long live Las 
Vegas . Vivir : to live . How do you say: I live ?  
S: Vivo.   
T: Vivo. Here  in Spanish is aquí  or acá. Aquí  in Spain, and acá in Latin America. Everybody 
understands both. It's an extrem ely common word so you don't have to worry aquí  or acá. So I 
live here :  
S: Vivo aquí .  
T: Vivo aquí, Vivo acá.  Good. I don't live here :  
S: No vivo aquí.   
T: Good. But he lives here . And let's stress that because we're contrasting. But HE lives here:   
S: Pero él ?  
T: Yes.  
S: Vive aquí.   
T: Good. Let's make it all together. I don't live here , but he lives here:   
S: No vivo aquí, pero él vive aquí.   
T: Good. And don't be afraid to try the soft b. If it's too difficult then it's not a problem that you 
pronounce the / vuh/. Maybe you want to pronounce the / vuh/ at the beginning and then see what 
happens. But the more you pronounce like how people are speaking around you, the more you 
understand. To know is:  
S: Saver.T: Saber. This is a b.  
S: It's a b, saber.  
T: Saber.  This is a b so you're not going to pronounce a v. Saber. So we have vivir , to live . And we 
need to open up the association of the letter v to include that soft b. Maybe you look up the word 
in the dictionary for summer which is verano  or /berano /. Now if you just program your mind 
with verano  maybe you won't get it when you hear / berano /. So it always makes sense to 
pronounce the words the way people around you are pronouncing. So if you are practicing Spanish 
with Colombians, take their acc ent. If you are practicing with people from Rio de la Plata, Buenos 
Aries, Montevideo, who have kind of a particular accent, take that accent as well. If you're 
practicing with people from Madrid, take their accent. The more you speak lik e the people you're 
listening to, the easier you understand. Vivir , to live . How is: we live ?  
S: Vivimos.   
T: Vivimos. There we have the i popping up: vivimos . But for the other versions, we’re going to have 
the /e/. So he lives :  
S: Veve.   
T: Some vowel harmony you're making there, Vivir ? The / e/ is correct but you changed the beginning 
to match that / e/.  
S: Vive.   
T: Good. Vive. Before you said veve.  This is vowel harmony again. So you must consciously take off 
that ending, see what you're left with, vivir  - viv, and put on your ending: vive - e. Good.  
They live , or you guys :  
S: Viven.   
T: Viven. They live here :  
S: Viven aquí .  
T: Viven aquí, viven acá. The word for where  is dónde, dónde.  So how would you say: ¿where do 
they live ?:S: ¿Dónde viven ?  
T: I want to know where they live :  
S: Quiero saber dónde viven.   
T: Good. Quiero saber dónde viven. Good. Entender  is to understand . Entender . We said we can 
use comprender  as well, which might be easy to remember, but entender  is mu ch more common. 
How do you say: I understand ?  
S: Entiendo.   
T: Entiendo. Good. The e splits : entender -entiendo . He understands :  
S: Entiende.   
T: Entiende. He doesn't understand :  
S: No entiende.   
T: Why doesn't he understand?   
S: ¿Por qué no entiende?   
T: ¿Por qué no entiende? Good. I want to know why he doesn't understand :  
S: Quiero saber por qué no entiende.   
T: Quiero saber por qué no entiende. How do you think you would say: we understand ?  
S: Entendemos.   
T: Good. So for -er verbs we have -emos . So this is the only difference in the entire language between 
-er verbs and -ir verbs. For everything else they are exactly the same. But for we in the present 
tense, we get -imos  and -emos . Vivir -vivimos , venir -venimos , preferir -preferimos , and then for 
-er verbs -emos . Entender -entendemos . Perder , which we said was to lose . So how do you say: 
we lose ?  
S: Perdemos.T: Perdemos. Good. The word for always  in Spanish is siempre.  So how would you say: we always 
lose? (You can put the siempre  before or afterwa rds.)  
S: Siempre perdemos.   
T: Siempre perdemos. We always lose . Or perdemos siempre .