Track 19  
T: We said that the word for always  was siempre .  
S: Siempre.   
T: Good. Now if you know Italian or some other Latin language, maybe you have some thing like 
sempre  in that language, and you can see again that the e is splitting between sempre  and siempre . 
So if you know one of these other languages, or have studied them, it can be useful just to notice 
that. And just noticing that helps you internalize this new word. So for example, well in Spanish 
is bien like in the beginning of welcome , bienvenido . This in Italian is bene . We see that we get 
rid of the e, the last e, and the e in the middle splits. You have from French bon for good . What 
do you  think good  might be in Spanish? What do you think you will do to make that more Spanish?  
S: Bueno.   
T: Bueno. We also said that vamos  meant we are going or let's go , and it's something you're gonna 
hear all the time. Vamos , vamos , let's go .  
Now, another  useful skill that we want in language learning is to work backwards, not just to work 
from the “to” form, take off the -ar or the -er or -ir and add bits on. But we want to get in the habit 
of also working backwards, because maybe we see or hear some where a word like vamos , and we 
want to be able to work backwards from vamos  to get the other versions. Taking off the ending 
which is for we, and put ting our other bits on. So could you work out from vamos  how it would 
be he goes or is going, she goes or is going , you (formal) go or are going ?  
S: The thing is you don't know the ending of the “to" form.  
T: If you have -amos , you know which is your vowel, no?  
S: /a/.  
T: /a/. So, work backwards.  
S: Ah, yes, okay, so va?  
T: Va. What does that me an? Va:S: He/she/it  or you (formal) are going .  
T: Good. Va. How would you make that you (informal )?  
S: Vas.  
T: Vas. Good. If you want to say where are you going , you will hear to where are you going?  What 
was the word for to?  
S: A.  
T: A. So how woul d you say To where are you going? :  
S: ¿A dónde vas ?  
T: ¿A dónde vas ? What would be they go ? Or you (plural) go:  
S: Van.   
T: Van. Van. Good. So we can work backwards. Vamos -va-vas-van. What was the I version? It was 
irregular and we remembered it by thinking  I'm going on a voyage:   
S: Voy.   
T: Now the “to” form to go  is ir. I-r all by itself: ir. This is to go . So it's very irregular. And this is 
actually because this verb is two verbs that kind of stuck together to form one verb over time. So 
in Fre nch you have like aller , which means going , and in English we get alleyway  from this. An 
alleyway  is like a road, no? And this is related to ir. So ir comes from one verb, historically. And 
then the versions of ir actually come from a different verb. So they kind of stuck together over 
time and they give us this very irregular situation. That's just for interest, we don't need to know 
any of this. All we need to know is voy from voyage  and vamos  and we can work backwards from 
vamos  and there we have th e complete set. Voy, vamos, va, vas, van . But to go i s ir. they are 
coming from two different verbs historically, which is why we have ir, which is an -ir verb, but a 
coming up for all of the different versions. So how would you say I want to go ?  
S: Quiero ir.   
T: Good. I can go . I have the power to go :  
S: Puedo ir.T: Good. I must go :  
S: Debo ir.   
T: Debo ir. I have to go.  So not I must go , debo ir ; I have to go . What is I have  from tener ?  
S: Tengo.   
T: Tengo. And what do we add to that to get the meaning of have to ?  
S: A?  
T: Que. Like I said there's no comfortable translation for it, but we add on que to tengo  and we get 
the feeling of “have to" rather than the feeling of possession. So I have to go :  
S: Tengo que ir.   
T: Tengo que ir. I have  to go now :  
S: Tengo que ir ahora.   
T: Good. The word for tonight  is this night : esta noche . Esta noche. So I have to go tonight, I have 
to go this night :  
S: Tengo que ir esta noche.   
T: Now noche  is feminine. We know this because esta, the word for this, is ending in an a. So how 
would you say: the night ?  
S: La noche.   
T: La noche. So we said that words ending a are feminine, or there are feminine endings like -ión or 
-idad. La opinión, la oportunidad. If it ends in an e, there's actually no way o f knowing whether 
it's masculine or feminine by the word. You have to look up what's around it, or in the dictionary 
it will tell you. But if you hear it in conversation, you have a look at what's around it, esta noche , 
and then you can go oh okay, so  noch e is feminine. Another example of a feminine word that ends 
in an e is carne , carne . What do you think carne  means? It's not at all obvious. You have carnage  
in English. It was just carnage . Carne  is meat . Meat.  And it's a feminine word. So the meat :  
S: La carne.T: La carne. I don't eat meat :  
S: No como carne.   
T: No como carne. The word for and in Spanish is y. And it's just spelt with a y by itself. Y.  
S: Y.  
T: I don't eat meat and I don't drink , or I don't take, alcohol . So tomar  was to take , tomar . And 
comer , to eat . So how would you say I don't eat meat, and I don't take alcohol ? I don't drink 
alcohol .  
S: No como carne.   
T: And:  
S: Y.  
T: I don’t drink alcohol :  
S: No tomo alcohol - alcohol .  
T: Alcohol.  Good. Because we don't pronounce h in Spanish, do we? No como carne y no tomo 
alcohol. Or If you wanted to say I eat meat , and I take alcohol ; I eat meat, and I drink alcohol,  
how would that be?  
S: Como carne y tomo alcohol.   
T: Good.