Track 2  
Teacher : English and Spanish are two related languages. English is considered a Germanic language, 
but it ’s kind of half Latin. We have a huge amount of Latin vocabulary in English and t his Latin 
vocabulary we can convert it over to Spanish really easily because Spanish is practically Modern 
Latin.  
Whoever said Latin is a dead language lied. Just in the same way that Greek is a modern version 
of ancient Greek, Spanish is like a modern version of Latin. It's actually a street Latin that became 
Spanish. So we can identify Latin words in English , and we can, with just some rule or other, 
convert them over to Spanish , and this will give us around 3,000 words, I didn't count them , but 
there  are around 3,000 words. So for example , one of these rules is that words ending in -al tend 
to come from Latin, so we can make them Spanish. So to give you an example, normal  in Spanish 
is normal .  
Student: Normal .  
Teacher : Normal , good. What do you notice different between normal  and normal ?  
Student: Well, the accent.  
Teacher : What do you mean by the accent?  
Student: Well the  …, well where the sound is stressed, with which vowel it’s stressed.  
Teacher : Where ’s it stressed in E nglish?  
Student: On the o.  
Teacher : Good. At the beginning, right? NORmal , NORmal , and in Spanish we’re stressing the end, 
right? NorMAL .  
Student: NorMAL .  
Teacher : So if we assume the same happens with other words, how do you think you would say metal ?  
Metal :  
Student: Metal .Teacher : Metal . To get a perfect accent in Spanish we just need to pronounce all of the vowels exactly 
as they are written so a, e, i, o, u in Spanish is /ah/ , /eh/, /ee/, /oh/, /oo/, where in English the vowel,  
it can have many different sounds. Like if you look at the a sound in apple  or in mare , it's a very 
different sound. But a in Spanish is always going to be /ah/, e is always going to be /eh/. So if you 
pronounce the vowels as they're written , not this kin d of uh -uh-uh English vowels that we get , then 
we get a perfect Spanish accent.  
Student: NorMAL , MeTAL .  
Teacher : Perfect. So we can begin to make sentences with this already. The word for is in Spanish is 
es, e-s.  
Student: Es.  
Teac her: Es. And this also means it is, she is , he is , or even you are , talking to somebody formally.  
So now we can say he is normal , she is normal :  
Student: Es normal .  
Teacher : Yeah , Es normal . And you pronounced an s which is excellent. English spe akers should 
beware that maybe they feel themselves pronouncing a z, because many times we have an s in 
English like in the word is, and we pronounce a z. So you might find slipping out a /z/, but this is 
incorrect --you should be careful to pronounce an s. S. Es normal . Good, how would you say legal ?  
Student: Legal .  
Teacher : Yeah , legal . So how would you say it is legal ?  
Student: Es legal .  
Teacher : Es legal . Illegal ?  
Student: Ilegal .  
Teacher : Ilegal , good. So here in Englis h we have an i and an e producing the same sound, “ illegal” .  
The i and the e are producing the same sound, so this is really confusing if you want to learn 
English. But in Spanish you're not going to have this problem. The i is like in ink and the e is like 
in elephant . Ilegal . Ilegal . So, it is illegal :Student: Es ilegal.   
Teacher : Good. Es ilegal . What if you wanted to say he is liberal ? You don't need the word for he if 
you know who you’re talking about, you can just use es.  
Student: Es libera l.   
Teacher : Yeah, es liberal . Now Spanish is much more phonetic than English; what that means is that 
the letters are going to represent the same sound , where English has a million rules and a million 
exceptions to those rules. I mean it's really ha rd even for native English speakers often to 
understand how to pronounce a new word when they see it written; but you're not going to have 
that problem in Spanish. So you know natural  and you don't just want to just change the accent 
and say natuRAL ; this is not Spanish. You want to think “how is it written?” and pronounce the 
letters as they are. So how do you think you would say natural  in Spanish?  
Student: Natural.   
Teacher : Natural , good. That’s a t, so you pronounce a t. A is like /ah/, u is like /oo/:  natural . Very 
good, and the accent on the end as well. It's natural ?  
Student: Es natural.   
Teacher : Es Natural.  If you want to say it isn't  or it’s not, the word for not or don't  is the same as the 
word for no. And t he word for no in Spanish is the same as the word  for no in English, but you 
pronounce it like in Spanish. So how do you think you say no in Spanish?  
Student: No.  
Teacher : No. Good. And you put this before is if you want to say it is not , he is not , she is no t, you 
(formal) are not . So how would that sound, it is not ?  
Student: No es.   
Teacher : No es , good. So now we can say things like it's not normal :  
Student: No es normal.   
Teacher : No es normal . How would you say ideal ? So really th ink about how it's spelled and try and 
pronounce each of those vowels as they're written. I like ink, e like elephant, a like apple.Student: Ideal.   
Teacher : Good. Ideal . How would you say it’s ideal ?  
Student: Es ideal.   
Teacher : Es id eal. It’s not ideal:   
Student: No es ideal.   
Teacher : Good. No es ideal.  Perfect. How would you say fatal?  
Student: Fatal.   
Teacher : Fatal.  Good. Natal:   
Student: Natal.   
Teacher : Natal , good. Colonial:   
Student: Colonial.   
Teacher : Colonial.  Cultural :  
Student: Culturial ?  
Teacher : So think about how it’s written.  
Student: Cultural ?  
Teacher : Yes and perfect Spanish accent  there . Cultural , very nice. Annual:   
Student: Anual.   
Teacher : Anual . And you cut this y sound tha t comes in English ann-y-ual. This y sound comes from 
nowhere in English and you cut it out ’cause you focused on how it’s written. Anual. Very nice.  
Dental:   
Student: Dental.   
Teacher : Tooth in Spanish is diente . So this is coming from dental . So i f you look up tooth  in the 
dictionary and you find diente , rather than treating it as a random piece of vocabulary that youhave to memorize, you can relate it back to dental . Oh okay, like dental  it comes from there. And 
this is useful for memory. A coupl e more: festival:   
Student: Festival.   
Teacher : Personal:   
Student: Personal.   
Teacher : Personal.  Good, total:   
Student: Total.   
Teacher : Total. Good, verbal:   
Student: Verbal.   
Teacher : Verbal . So if we wanted to say verb, we might not  have a rule to convert that word over. 
But if we know verbal  is verbal , we can guess that the verb is probably going to be the same in 
Spanish. And most of the time words are either the same that we don’t have a rule, maybe we need 
to stick an o or an  e or an a on the end. So we can make a guess. How do you think you say verb 
in Spanish?   
Student: Verbo ?  
Teacher : Yeah , that’s right. So with structure, with the building, when we’re going to be making 
sentences with these words, we don’t ever want  to guess. We want to take our time and think it 
through. But with vocabulary, we can happily guess and try. Imagine we said verba  for example, 
and they would look at us funny and they would go “ah verbo ” and when that person says “ah, 
verbo ” then we lear n “oh ok this is the right word”. And it’s the best way to learn quickly.