Track 21  
T: So, we have seen how we can use the present to talk about the future in Spanish using voy a , vamos 
a, or using some future context ( pront o- soon, mañana - tomorrow , la semana que viene - the 
week that comes - next week ).  
But we can also use the present in Spanish to talk about the past, just as we can in English. In 
English and in Spanish we have three ways to talk about the past, or three m ain ways to talk about 
the past. We can say, for example: I ate. We can say: I was eating . And we can say: I have eaten .  
Now, when we say I have eaten , we are using I have , which is the present, and then eaten  is like a 
version of the verb which is kind o f complicated in English. You say I have eaten , I have gone , I 
have wanted . Wanted, eaten, gone, they are all very different. So that is kind of complicated in 
English, how to build that. But in Spanish it is very simple.  
So, we have: I ate, I was eating , and I have eaten . This I have eaten  is going to be the first past 
that we learn. And we are actually using the present. Now, this have  is not tener . Tener  we use 
for possession, and we use with the combination of que to give this meaning of "have to". Now , 
the verb that we use for have  in the sense of I have eaten , I have gone , in Spanish it's haber .  
Haber : h-a-b-e-r. And of course we have the silent h there, in haber . Haber  is to have in the sense 
of I have eaten . But haber  is extremely irregular, there is no “habo” , it is extremely irregular. But 
there is a very easy way we can remember all of the versions of haber , even though it is very 
irregular.  
What are the two vowel sounds that we have inside of the verb haber ?  
S: /a/ and / e/.  
T: Good, we have /a/ and / e/ inside the word haber , and we are going to use that to help us remember 
the versions. Let's start with he.  
S: He.  
T: All by itself, it means I have . It is spelled h-e. And of course, we have the silent h there from haber  
in he (h-e). I have . We actually saw already one other verb that forms its I version in this way. 
What was to know ?S: Saber .  
T: Saber . And I know  is?  
S: Sé.  
T: Sé. I have  from haber  is spelled h-e, just like sé from saber  is spelled s-e. They are the only two 
verbs tha t form the I version in this way, in this very irregular way. So you get sé from saber , and 
you get he from haber . Different from saber , all of the versions of haber  are irregular.  
Now, I and we are connected. We can see how we is the plural of I. I, and then when I include you 
and I say we, it is like the plural of I. So, I and we are connected. So, just knowing that, if you had 
to guess what is we have,  knowing that I have is he, what do you think you would guess?  
S: Hes?  
T: This works with nouns and adjectives. So, it is a very good example of why, whilst we are avoiding 
grammatical terminology, we want to know what type of word we are dealing with, because 
different words behave in different ways. Nouns, words you can put the or a in front of: la sem ana, 
una semana - the week, a week ; and adjectives, words that describe, that you can put is in front of: 
is red, is tall: these words use -s for plural. But we have never seen the verb do that, have we? 
What does the verb use for we?  
S: -amos .  
T: Or?  
S: -emos .  
T: Or?  
S: -imos .  
T: And what do they have in common , -amos, -emos, -imos ?  
S: The -mos.  
T: Good, ok. So if he is I have  (h-e), how do you think it might be we have ?  
S: Hemos .T: Hemos . Good. So, from haber  you get he and hemos , no? And we  don't want to memorise this, 
like we said we can think just this thought, just the thought "What vowels do we have in haber ? 
/a/ and /e/. Ok: he. He by itself is I, it is connected to we: he and hemos ."  
Now we go to the other vowel / a/. H-a all by itsel f (h-a) ha means she has, it has, he has, you  
(formal) have . Now I am sure you can tell me the rest of them. What are the other versions? What 
is they have ?  
S: Han.  
T: Good. So, we start with this base of he and ha, and we can remember that just by  looking at the 
vowels that are inside haber . And then, we can add on what we need. So, we have he for I have , 
hemos  for we have , we have ha (h-a) for he/she/it/you (formal) have  or has, you added an -n and 
what did you get?  
S: Han.  
T: And what does that  mean?  
S: They have .  
T: Or?  
S: You guys have .  
T: Good. And how would you say you have  informally?  
S: Has.  
T: Has. Good. And that is your set : he-hemos, ha -has-han. So you have two key vowel sounds /e/ 
and /a/. He-hemos for I and for we (for I and t he plural of I which is we). And then you have ha 
for he-she-it, han for they, has for you (informal). Now we need to learn how to make eaten , how 
to make gone , how to make wanted , if we want to say I have eaten , I have gone , I have wanted . 
This is very si mple in Spanish. -ar verbs will lo se their -ar, they will lo se their final -ar, and they 
will put -ado on the end. So for example, we have to speak  which is hablar . If you want to build 
spoken , you take off that -ar and you put on -ado.  
S: Hablado .T: Hablado . Now we can speak about the past. Now we can say I have spoken , and we need to think 
about the two bits separately . I have spoken :  
S: Is it he? He hablado .  
T: Very good. He hablado . I haven't spoken.  Where do you think the no is going to go?  I haven't 
spoken:   
S: In the beginning.  
T: Good.  
S: No he hablado .  
T: Very good. No he hablado . I haven't spoken . We have spoken ?  
S: Hemos hablado .  
T: Hemos hablado . He has spoken :  
S: Ha hablado .  
T: Good. She has spoken ?  
S: Ha hablado .  
T: Good. They?  
S: Han hablado .  
T: You (informal )?  
S: Has hablado .  
T: Perfect, well done. Now, this is actually more useful, this past, than what you might think it is, 
because this is used even more in Spanish than it is in English. So maybe you want the past I spoke , 
but you can use, for now, I have spoken . This "have past" is very popular and used much more 
than in English. So, how would you say anticipation ?  
S: Anticipación .  
T: Good, and to anticipate ?S: Anticipar .  
T: Good. How would you say we have antic ipated it ? So, there is a few things you have to think 
about. Think about them separately, then put them together. We have anticipated it.   
S: Hemos anticiparlo .  
T: So, to get anticipated  you take away the -ar, and you put -ado.  
S: Ah! Yes. Hemos anticip ado lo .  
T: And where does that lo go? Because anticipado  is not like -  
S: Ah! It has changed now, so it is in the beginning.  
T: Yes.  
S: So, lo hemos anticipado .  
T: Good. Lo hemos anticipado . The word for for, like in time, we have anticipated it for a long time  
for example, is por. Por.  
S: Por.  
T: You might know por favor , which means please  in Spanish. Which means "for a favour". Por 
favor , "for a favour". So this por is also for, in the sense of "for periods of time." So, if you want 
to say we have anticipated it for a long time , we will just say we have anticipated it for much time . 
And maybe there are some bits in there that you think you don't know. But we will see when we 
get to them. So, the first bit is we have anticipated it .  
S: Lo hemos anti cipado .  
T: Good. For:  
S: Por.  
T: A lot or much :  
S: Mucho .T: Time . We saw briefly before that we have a word in English that we use for time, that we only use 
with music. What was that word?  
S: Tempo .  
T: Tempo . And how did it change in Spanish?  
S: Tiempo ?  
T: Tiempo , yes! The e split. So: we have anticipated it for a long time .  
S: Lo hemos anticipado por mucho tiempo .  
T: Good. Lo hemos anticipado por mucho tiempo . Very good. Maybe you want to ask somebody 
Did you celebrate?  And you think "oh, I  don't know did yet in Spanish". You can just say: Have 
you celebrated ? And that is fine. Like I said, it is used even more in Spanish than in English.  
So, some certain situations it might sound a little bit uncomfortable the translation into English. 
But in Spanish, most of the time, it is going to be fine. So, have you celebrated ? Let ’s speak 
informally.  
S: Has – celebración... celebrar... celebrado.   
T: Good, good.  
S: So, ¿ has celebrado?   
T: Good, ¿ has celebrado ? Haven't you celebrated ?  
S: ¿No has ce lebrado ?  
T: Why haven't you celebrated ?  
S: ¿Por qué no has celebrado ?  
T: Good. What was the word for where ?  
S: Dónde .  
T: Dónde . Where have you celebrated ?  
S: ¿Dónde has celebrado ?T: Good. Where have you celebrated it?   
S: ¿Dónde lo has celebrado ?  
T: Good. So, -ar verbs, we take away the -ar and we put -ado. And we get this version of the verb 
that we need after haber , which in English has many different forms. Like I said: you have gone, 
wanted, eaten...  it changes a lot. But in Spanish we get rid of the -ar and we put -ado. We said that 
to take , and also sometimes to drink , is tomar . Tomar .  
S: Tomar .  
T: So how would you say I have taken ?  
S: He tomado .  
T: He tomado . Good. We have taken :  
S: Hemos tomado .  
T: Good. Has she taken it ? Has she taken  it?  
S: ¿Han lo tomado ?  
T: That is a guess, you are looking at me like it is a guess - I want you to establish your own thought 
process of how you are going to find it. So what is the first bit you need to think about? Has she 
taken it?   
S: Has she .  
T: Good. What is that?  
S: Ok, so it is he and hemos  for I and we.  
T: Yes.  
S: So it is.. oh! It is ha! It is just ha.  
T: Yes. So, has she taken it?   
S: ¿Lo ha tomado ?T: Sometimes I am going to build you up step by step, sometimes I am just going to give you the 
sentence and you need to deconstruct what thoughts you need to have first, and to divide it up into 
various thoughts to get the sentence, resisting any temptation to guess or to say something that we 
are not sure of. You can be sure and be wrong, t here is no problem there, eh? But we want to think 
about it, dividing the sentence up into each individual thing we need to think about. First, she has , 
ha. She has taken , ha tomado . She has taken it . It is lo, where do I put the lo? Before the change d 
verb. Lo ha tomado .