Track 22  
T: So, we were learning how we can use the present to talk about the past, using haber , which is to 
have , in sentences like I have gone , I have eaten . What do you think terminar  means?  
Terminar :  
S: To terminate .  
T: And what , what verb would we use more commonly in English?  
S: Finish ?  
T: Finish . Terminar  is to finish . Do you remember how to say I have  from haber ? We can look at 
the two vowels we have in haber , and this will set us off.  
S: Ah, yes.  
T: Ok. So, I have:   
S: Is it he or ha?  
T: It's he. Good. So, we have :  
S: Hemos .  
T: Good. How do you spell he?  
S: H-e.  
T: H-e. Good. And that h comes from haber , that silent h that you have there. Good. So, how would 
you say I have finished ? Firstly, how do you make finishe d? How do you get the word finished  
from terminar ?  
S: -ado?  
T: Good. So, you have all the information, now you can build the sentence . I have finished :  
S: He terminado .  
T: Good. He terminado . And I have finished it ? I have finished it :S: He lo term inado .  
T: What is the rule about where this lo, la, me, te , can go?  
S: It's in the beginning of the sentence, actually, isn't it?  
T: This would be a simplification of the rule that you might find unhelpful.  
S: Well, if it was in the “to” form it would be at the end.  
T: So, after the “to” form or:  
S: Or before everything, everything else?  
T: Before the changed verb. So this is the way you want to think about it. If we simplify the thought 
to "at the beginning or at the end", when there is other words there, we might be really confused 
about where we can put it. So, we must think “after the complete verb ”, the “to” form, or “before 
the changed verb ”. So if you say he lo terminado , you ’ve actually got it after a changed verb, you 
put it after he. So, this is a very rare situation in Spanish, where we have two changed verbs 
together: he terminado . We see, usually after a changed verb we get a complete verb: quiero 
terminar , I want to finish ; puedo terminar , I can to finish ; debo terminar , I must/ I owe to finish . 
So, here we have two changed verbs together, he terminado , weird situation, which means there 
is only one place it can go.  
S: Before the he.  
T: Yes.  
S: It's lo he terminado .  
T: Good. Lo he terminado . And I have finished them :  
S: Los he  terminado .  
T: Los he terminado . So, with -ar verbs, we take of f the -ar and we put -ado. With -er/-ir verbs, we 
take away the -er or the -ir and we put -ido to get this form of the verb that we need after haber .  
S: Whether it is an -e - there is n o -edo?T: No. Like I said, there is only one difference between -er and -ir verbs, in all of the Spanish 
language, only one occasion where they are doing things differently and that was in the present for 
we. So, for example, we have vender , which means to sell , and how do you say we sell ?  
S: Vendemos .  
T: Good. And we had venir , to come , and how do you say we come ?  
S: Venimos .  
T: Venimos . So, we had -emos  and -imos . This is the only time in the whole Spanish language that 
these two verbs are do ing something differently. To get this form of the verb that we need after 
haber  everything goes to -ido. So vender  becomes?  
S: Vendido .  
T: Vendido . And venir  become s?  
S: Venido .  
T: Venido . Now we understand where is bienvenido  from, well-come . Perder , which was to lose , 
becomes?  
S: Perdido .  
T: Perdido . Good. Now we can make some sentences. How do you say I have lost ?  
S: He perdido .  
T: He perdido . What if you wanted to be emphatic and used the word for I to emphasize?  
S: Yo he perdido .  
T: Good. Yo he perdido . And, we said that there was a connection between I and we, that we is the 
plural of I, so this can help us remember that there is a little connection between he for I have  and 
we have , which is?  
S: Hemos .  
T: Hemos . They both use / e/: he, hemos . Good. So how do you say we have lost ?S: Hemos perdido .  
T: Hemos perdido . Nosotros . Nosotros  is the word for we, for a male or mixed group. If you are just 
females, what do you think you might say?  
S: Nosotras .  
T: Nosotras . Good. You pronounced  an s there, which was very good, most English speakers find 
themselves accidentally saying / nozotros /, with a z. Not / nozotros/ , but nosotros . It is an s.  
Nosotros . Or nosotras . So how would you say we have lost,  emphasizing?  
S: Nosotras - sorry, nosotro s.  
T: Well, it could be.  
S: Hemos perdido.   
T: Good. Nosotros  or nosotras  (if you are all females) hemos perdido . Good. So, we had he and 
hemos , and then for the rest of the  versions we go to the other vowel which was in this word 
haber .  
So, give me the other versions. Firstly he/she/it/you ( formal) have/has :  
S: Ha.  
T: So, lets start with that one, how would you say he has lost ?  
S: Ha perdido .  
T: Good, and if you wanted to clarify or emphasize that it was he and not she, for example?  
S: Il?  
T: Close, él.  
S: Sorry, él.  
T: Good.  
S: Él ha perdido .  
T: Él ha perdido . And she?S: La?  
T: So, you must differentiate between she and her, don't just let that feminine idea come in your mind 
and pick one of these. You must take the time to deci de which one is it. Is it she or is it her?  
S: Ella.  
T: Good. So she has lost :  
S: Ella ha perdido .  
T: Good. You have lost , informally :  
S: Has perdido .  
T: Good. Now, if you want to emphasize, if you want to say YOU have lost,  the word for you, for 
informal, is tú (t-ú). Tú.  
S: Tú has perdido .  
T: Good. Tú has perdido . What was I love you ?  
S: Te quiero .  
T: Te quiero . So, what is the difference between tú and te? It is the same as the difference between 
she and her, and he and him, only in En glish we don't have two separate words for you and you in 
those two different positions. He sees, I see him . So, he sees , we use he. Then I see him , we use 
him. This is very intuitive to us in English, we don't think about it. She sees, I see her . There we  
have the same change. But you doesn't change, you see, I see you . So, that might confuse us in 
Spanish because in English it doesn't change, but all we need to understand is that tú goes in the 
group of él, ella, yo: tú (you); and te is in the group of th ose little words, lo, la, me: te. So, lets 
practise this. What was to see or to view ?  
S: Ver?  
T: Ver. And I see is a little bit irregular, do you remember how it was?  
S: Veo.  
T: So, how would you say I see it,  I see him  or I see you  (formal )?S: Lo veo .  
T: Lo veo . Good. I see her  or I see it (feminine thing) or I see you  speaking formally to a female?  
S: La veo .  
T: La veo . Or how would you say I see them  (females) or I see you  (plural, all females) or I see them  
(feminine  objects )?  
S: Las veo .  
T: Good. And what if they were masculine or mixed objects or people?  
S: Los veo .  
T: Good. One set of words - we have me for me, we have te for you (informal), we have lo for he, for 
masculine object, you (formal) or even for neuter, which kind of just  means  when  something 
doesn't have gender, maybe you'd say I want to see it  and that it refers to a situation or something 
like this, you will use a lot, and then from this the other ones come, but building from lo, so you 
change the o to a, to make it fem inine, and you add your -s for plural. Which means one sound is 
left in this little set which is us, do you remember how is us?  
S: Nos.  
T: Nos. Good. So this is one set. Now lets practice the other set. How do you say he sees ?  
S: Is it ve?  
T: Good. A nd what if you want to clarify or emphasize?  
S: Él ve .  
T: Él ve . Good. She sees :  
S: Ella ve .  
T: Ella ve . Good. I see:  
S: Yo veo .  
T: Good. Now we said the word for we is nosotros , not us, us is nos. We is nosotros . So we see :S: Nosotros vemos .  
T: Nosotros vemos . Good. We said that you (informal) was tú. Tú. The you in you see , tú ves .  
Which means that we have also the formal you to learn, which is usted . Usted .  
S: Usted .  
T: Usted . Which is the formal you, it is actually a contraction of vuestra  merced , which means your 
honour . Something like this contracted to usted . So this is the formal you. So how would you say 
you see talking formally?  
S: Usted ve .  
T: Good. You see it  (talking formally) :  
S: Lo ve usted ?  
T: Or usted lo ve . It can be either  way. The word order in Spanish is much more flexible than in 
English. Lo ve usted . Usted lo ve . Either way. How would you say you see them  (still talking 
formally) ? 
S: Usted ve los .  
T: Ok..  
S: Sorry! Los ve .  
T: Good. Usted los ve . Good. So, usted is flexible. Los is not flexible. Usted los ve . Los ve usted . 
Now, the word for they, the word for they is ellos  (e-l-l-o-s, and this l-l in most Spanish dialects 
makes a / y/ sound. You might hear / ezhos / around Río de la Plata in Buenos Aires of A rgentina; 
Montevideo, Uruguay. You might hear like a / j/ kind of sound in Colombia /ejos/. But in the great 
majority of the Spanish speaking world double l and y make / y/: /eyos/ or / eyas/. I am sure you can 
work out the difference between the two. What i s the difference between ellos  and ellas ?  
S: Ellos  is for males, or mixed group, and ellas is for females.  
T: Good. So, how would you say they see  emphasizing or clarifying that it's they?  
S: Ellos  is it ven?T: Yes! Ellos ven . They see them :  
S: Ellos  los ven .  
T: Ellos los ven . Good. Or we could have had any combination of gender: ellas los ven, ellas las ven, 
ellos las ven , etc. How would you say: they see me ?  
S: Ellos me ven .  
T: Good. Ellos me ven . So we are understanding that we have two separate  groups of very  
important words. The set of : yo, él, ella, ellos, ellas, nosotros, tú , and usted . Yo veo. Tú ves. 
Usted/él/ella ve . Ellos  or ellas ven. And nosotros vemos . Then we have the other set of words - 
me, lo, la , los, las, nos, te .