Track 23  
T: So, I want us to run through the forms of haber , this to have  that we use to go into the past. We 
said that we can remember them by looking at the two vowel sounds that we have inside the word 
haber . So give me I hav e and we have :  
S: He and hemos .  
T: Good. And give me the rest of the versions.  
S: Ha, has, han.  
T: Good. We said that nouns ending a are feminine nouns. So, for example, the house  - la casa . So, 
words ending a are feminine. But, words ending ma are masculine. There's a small group of word s 
that end ma, which are masculine words. For example, the problem  in Spanish is el problema .  
S: El problema.   
T: Good. How would you say  Have you understood the problem?  Have you understood the problem?  
What was to understand?   
S: Comprender .  
T: Compr ender , good. We can use comprender  or we can use entender . But comprender  is perfect 
here as well. Have you understood the problem?  And let's talk formally, to usted .  
S: ¿Ha entendido el problema ?  
T: Good. ¿ Ha entendido el problema ? Good. So, a very comm on error for people learning Spanish 
is to say la problema . Now, if we look at why these words ending ma are actually masculine, it's 
going to help us internalize it. So these words that end ma actually come from Greek. Problema  
in Greek is provlima . Syste m in Greek is systima . In Spanish, it's sistema . So how would you say 
the system ?  
S: El sistema .  
T: El sistema . So it's el. Now in Greek, these words are neuter words. In Greek, you have masculine, 
feminine, and neuter. And neuter words in Greek look lik e masculine words. They have a similarword for the. They look kind of like masculine words. So when they went into Spanish, or into 
Latin, they got mistaken as masculine words. So if we can identify them, there's a key group of 
words we can avoid committi ng this error with. If it ends ma, it's probably from Greek and 
probably masculine. So how would you say the system  again?  
S: El sistema .  
T: El sistema . How would you say Have you understood the system?  (talking informally) Have you 
understood the system ?:  
S: ¿Has entendido el sistema ?  
T: Good. ¿ Has entendido el sistema ? Good. Sentir , in Spanish, sentir  is to feel , related to sensation. 
So sentir , to feel . And you can also use it like to perceive , in the sense of smell. So, if you wanted 
to ask,  for example, Have you felt the aroma? it would be a way of asking Have you smelt the 
aroma?  Have you felt it? So how would you say that? Have you felt the aroma?:   
S: ¿Has sentido el aroma ?  
T: Good. ¿ Has sentido el aroma ? Good. So el again. So we have el: el problema , el sistema , el 
programa , el aroma , el panorama . El clima , which is a little bit different in English, which 
means climate , el clima . And some others. Have you understood the program ?:  
S: ¿Has entendido el programa ?  
T: Good. Again, how was to lose ? (Perishable)  
S: Perdir .  
T: Close .  
S: Perder .  
T: Perder . Good. So how would you say I have lost ?  
S: He perdido .  
T: Good. Now what if you wanted to emphasize I have lost ?  
S: Yo he perdido .T: Good. Now if you want to say I have got lost , I have got lost , you can just say I have lost myself . 
We said that I get ready  is I prepare myself.  Me preparo . We don't use this in Spanish, I get ready . 
You say I ready myself . Me preparo . So you don't say I get lost  or I have got lost . You say I have 
lost myself . So how would you say that?  
S: Me he perdido .  
T: Again  
S: Me he perdido .  
T: Yes. When you say it fluently, it doesn't actually sound any different. Which is why I asked for it 
again, to make sure that you were putting it. Because the / e/ of me and the / e/ of he will blend 
together. Me he perdido . Ahh. So that means I have lost myself , or I have got lost . Now what if 
you wanted to be emphatic as well and say I have lost myself ?  
S: Yo me he perdido .  
T: Good. Yo me he perdido . How is you h ave lost  (speaking informally)?  
S: Has perdido .  
T: Good. Has perdido . We said that the word for you in the sense of you lose , you see , not I see you , 
but you see , is tú for informal you: tú, t-u.  
S: Tú.  
T: So how would you say YOU  have lost , being emphatic?  
S: Tú ha perdido .  
T: There's a bit of a contradiction there.  
S: Tú has perdido .  
T: Good. Tú has perdido . Good. So just as me can mean me, or myself , te can mean you or yourself . 
So how would you say you have got lost , you have lost yoursel f?  
S: Te has perdido .  
T: Good. Te has perdido . Te has perdido . And what if you wanted to be emphatic as well?S: Tú te has perdido .  
T: Good. Tú te has perdido . Very good. What was we have , from haber ?  
S: Hemos .  
T: Hemos . Good. How would you say we have lost it ? We have lost it :  
S: Lo hemos perdido .  
T: Lo hemos perdido . Now how would you say we have lost ourselves , or we've got lost ?  
S: Nos hemos perdido .  
T: Good. Nos hemos perdido . And what if you wanted to say WE have got lost , WE have lost 
ourselves ?  
S: Nosotros nos hemos perdido .  
T: Good. Nosotros nos hemos perdido . Good.