Track 24  
T: The word to give in Spanish is dar. D-a-r, dar.  
S: Dar.   
T: Dar. Good. I give is doy. So it’s like boy ending –oy. Doy.  
S: Doy.   
T: Good. I give it:   
S: Lo doy .  
T: Good.  I give them:   
S: Los doy .  
T: Good. And what if they were feminine things that you are giving?  
S: Las doy .  
T: Good. How would you say he gives ?  
S: Da.  
T: Da. He gives , emphasizing he:  
S: Él da .  
T: Él da . Good. And she g ives:   
S: Ella da .  
T: Good. How do you say they give?   
S: Ellos dan .  
T: Good! Ellos dan or ellas for feminine. Ellas dan . Good. You (informal) give?  
S: Das.  
T: Das. And if you wanted to emphasize this you?S: Tú das.  
T: Good. The word for somethin g we said was algo. Algo . So how would you say he is giving me 
something ? He is giving me something :  
S: Él me da algo .  
T: Good! Él me da algo . They give me something :  
S: Me dan algo .  
T: Good. Me dan algo . Now if you want to say they give it to me , they give it to me , in Spanish you 
would just say they give me it . The personal word me is going to come first and then it is going to 
come and the position where they go we know this already. So how would you say they give me 
it? They give it to me:   
S: Me lo  dan.  
T: Very good. Me lo dan . Now emphasize or clarify.  
S: Ellos me lo dan .  
T: Ellos me lo dan . Good. Or ellas if they were female they. Ellas me lo dan . Good. We said that 
with some future context we don’t need to use the future. So if you want to say  I will give it to you 
tomorrow , you could just say I give it to you tomorrow . Lets talk informally, so informally how 
will you say I give you it tomorrow ?  
S: Te lo doy mañana .  
T: Te lo doy mañana . Very common, very Spanish sounding sentence. Te lo  doy mañana , I give 
you it tomorrow, sounds strange in English but perfect Spanish. Te lo doy mañana . How would 
you say are you giving it to me tomorrow?  And let’s speak formally , so complicated sentence in 
English. Are you giving it to me tomorrow ? What  we have to do in Spanish is just work out who 
is doing what. You work out who is doing what and to who and we build that, it's very simple in 
Spanish. Complicated sentence in English but not in Spanish. Talking formally, are you giving it 
to me tomor row?:  
S: Well it’s da.T: That’s the first thing you should work out, good.  
S: ¿Me lo da mañana ?  
T: Good. Now what if you wanted to emphasize you. Are YOU  giving it to me tomorrow ?:  
S: And  usted  can come in the beginning or the end?  
T: Yeah.  
S: So ¿usted me lo da mañana?   
T: ¿Usted me lo da mañana ? ¿Me lo da usted mañana ? ¿Me lo da mañana usted ? These words 
usted, yo, él , ella are extremely flexible for different emphasis. Again it’s not something we want 
to teach here, because those nuances of emphasis change depending on the dialect , and it’s 
something that you pick up in real life because where people mov e it around is accompanied with 
a change in the voice and hand expressions and you understand in this case intuitively which is 
emphatic. You guys is usted  but plural. Now if the word ends in a consonant in Spanish, you don’t 
just add –s, you add –es. So how would it sound, you guys ?  
S: Ustedes .  
T: Ustedes . Good. So now let’s say will you guys give it to us tomorrow?  So again we just wanna  
work out who is doing and to who or to what are they doing and then we can construct it. So, are 
you guys giving it to us tomorrow?:   
S: So it’s dan.  
T: Yes.  
S: It’s nos and it’s still lo.  
T: Good.  
S: ¿Nos lo dan mañana ?  
T: Good. Now this could  mean you guys  or they give it to us tomorrow . Now what if you wanted to 
clarify that it was you guys ?  
S: ¿Ustedes nos lo dan mañana?T: Good. ¿Ustedes nos lo dan mañana? ¿Nos lo dan mañana ustedes? ¿Nos lo dan ustedes 
mañana?  How do you say I want  to give ? I want to give:   
S: Quiero dar .  
T: Good. I want to give you it , talking informally. Informally, I want to give it to you :  
S: Quiero das .  
T: Work out the verbs first. I want to give , work that out first.  
S: Oh! Quiero dar .  
T: Good, to give you is something else, it’s not you give . I want to give , quiero dar , it to you :  
S: So it’s lo and it’s te.  
T: Good. And in what order do they come?  
S: It's te lo quiero dar .  
T: Good.