Track 27  
T: How would you say the situation  in Spanish?  
S: La situación .  
T: Good. -ión is a feminine ending, so the word takes la for the. La situación . Good.  Now in Spanish, 
adjectives are describing words. Adjectives are words that describe, like big or yellow  or happy . 
Words that we can put is in front of are adjectives, describing words. These words come after the 
noun they describe in Spanish. So instead o f saying, “the global situation" for example, you say 
“the situation global". There's a bit of flexibility for emphasis as well, but the normal standard 
position is to come after the noun. So how would you say the global situation ?  
S: La situación globa l.  
T: Good. La situación global . How would you say digital camera ? Digital camera :  
S: Cámara digital .  
T: Yeah. Cámara digital . Good. Cámara  is feminine, so a digital camera  is una cámara digital .  
So we have la for the, and una for a. So how would you s ay, I want to buy a digital camera ? What 
was the verb to buy ?  
S: Comprar .  
T: Good. So I want to buy a digital camera :  
S: Quiero comprar una cámara digital .  
T: Good. Quiero comprar una cámara digital . How would you say I want to buy the digital camera ?  
S: Quiero comprar la cámara digital .  
T: Good. Quiero comprar la cámara digital . What if you wanted to say, I want to buy it  and with 
the it, you meant the digital camera?  
S: Quiero comprarla .T: Good. So this la is it. There's a lot of words in Spa nish for car depending on where you are. It's 
one of the words that changes a lot between the dialects, but I think everybody understands all of 
the words that are heard. You might hear coche , which is related to coach ; carro , which of course 
is car, carro , so we have two r's in carro , that's why we have this rolling r. You might hear auto , 
where do you think auto  comes from?  
S: Automobile .  
T: Of course, and it exists: automóbil . But people will say auto . You might even hear máquina , 
which means machine . So machine , the car , máquina . This is another example of the q-u spelling 
producing k sound. M-a-q-u-i-n-a. Máquina .  
S: Máquina .  
T: Good. So there's a few words there for car, and you might hear others as well. Coche  is masculine, 
so how would you say the car ?  
S: El coche .  
T: Good. A for masculine words is un. U-n. Un. So, a car :  
S: Un coche .  
T: The machine ? Does máquina  look masculine or feminine?  
S: Feminine.  
T: Good. So the machine :  
S: La máquina .  
T: La máquina . A machine :  
S: Una máquina .  
T: Good. And does carro  look masculine or feminine?  
S: Masculine.  
T: Good. So the car :S: El carro .  
T: El carro . A car :  
S: Un carro .  
T: Un carro . Good. So it's the noun that has the gender, not the object. Of course it's no t the car that 
is masculine or feminine, it's the noun, it’s the word itself. So even though all of these words refer 
to car, some are masculine and some are feminine. Big, in Spanish, is grande, grande . Of course 
we can relate this to grand  in English, grande . So using any of these words that you like, how 
would you say, the big car ?  
S: La máquina grande .  
T: Good. La máquina grande . So la máquina grande , el auto grande . Now if you say  the big cars , 
this adjective is also going to become plural. How do  you say  the house ?  
S: La casa .  
T: Good. And how was the houses ?  
S: Las casas .  
T: Good, so la also became plural. So las casas , if you say the big houses , big is also going to become 
plural.  
S: Grandes .  
T: So how would you say the big houses ?  
S: Las casas grandes .  
T: Good. Las casas grandes . The big car , using auto :  
S: El auto grande .  
S: Good. El auto grande . The cars , using auto , so a masculine word, you say los autos . So el 
becomes los in plural. So how would you say the big cars ?  
S: Los autos grandes .T: Los autos  grandes.  Los carros grandes . Good. If you want to say Can you see the big car?  you 
can say, can you see ?, or in Spanish you can just say, do you see ? We kind of overuse this can a 
lot in English. So, Do you see the big car? :  
S: You informal? ¿Ves el coche grande ?  
T: Good. You needed some time there to look at ves. And this was the more common way actually, 
of saying it in Spanish: ¿ Ves el auto grande ? But, if you didn't have that time to think about it, 
even though  it's more natural to say it like this it really doesn't matter; you can say can you see…  
Now you would probably be quicker at building can you see  than you see  because can is something 
very common that you're going to be using all the time. So in conversa tion, where you just want 
to get the meaning across, you might want to use this. So how would you say  can you see the big 
car?:  
S: ¿Puedes ver el coche grande ?  
T: Good. So puedo, quiero, tengo que, debo , these verbs that are followed by two versions tha t 
you're going to be using a lot, even though the sentence is longer, they are short cuts. They are 
short cuts in thought. And once you become very confident with that, you're going to start noticing 
that people say things differently to you. So instea d of I can't find it, I don't find it . You will notice 
that yourself and your speech will adjust, but in the beginning what you're trying to do is to be 
conversational and correct structurally. Once you get over that hurdle of being communicative, 
you're going to start noticing that people say things differently to you. So instead of I can't find it , 
I don't find it . So you could say, I can't find it . How would you say I can't find it ? What was to 
find, or to encounter ?  
S: Encontrar .  
T: Encontr ar. So say  I can't find it:   
S: No puedo encontrarlo .  
T: Good. No puedo encontrarlo . This would be the short cut even though it's longer, it's much easier 
to build no puedo encontrarlo  because puedo  is something you're going to be using all the time, 
and encontrar  is in the “to" form. I don't find it , how would that be?  
S: No lo encuentro .T: No lo encuentro . Good. So it's very useful to bear in mind these verbs like puedo, debo , which 
we can use with “to" forms which give us a short cut and allow us to get conversational very 
quickly. What was to remain ?  
S: Quedar .  
T: Quedar . Good. And I remain myself  is how we get the meaning of I stay . So how do you say I 
stay?  
S: Quedarme .  
T: I remain myself . I remain myself . What's to remain ?  
S: Qued ar.  
T: What's I remain ?  
S: Quedo .  
T: Uh -huh. What's I remain myself ?  
S: Me quedo .  
T: What was happening?  
S: I was thinking “okay the me should go first, but it can't go first because the verb is in the ’to’ form ”. 
And I just got stuck.  
T: Well  you start when you're building the sentence with the verb. With who's doing that. So if you 
start with that, then it's not in the “to" form anymore. The order of thought is very important; the 
verb is the backbone. That's the first place you want to go: quedo . I remain myself : me quedo . So 
me quedo is I stay . The word for red in Spanish is rojo. Rojo.  This is spelled r-o-j-o. And j's in 
Spanish are pronounced / kh/. Like this, rojo.  
S: Rojo .  
T: And we have the initial r, so if you can do it, it will be th e rolling r. Rojo .  
S: Rojo .T: Good. So how would you say I'm staying in the red car ? I'm staying in the car red . The word for 
in is en. E-n. So let's divide it up: I'm staying , only think about that bit. I'm staying , I remain myself :  
S: Me quedo .  
T: In:  
S: En.  
T: The red car, the car red . And let's use the word auto  for car for now. So I'm staying in the red car, 
the car red :  
S: Me quedo en el auto rojo .  
T: Good. Me quedo en el auto rojo . Good. How would you say I have stayed in the red car ? I have 
stayed, I have remained myself in the red car . Again we want to divide it up. I have remained 
myself . There's a lot to think about there, in that first bit.  
S: Me he quedado .  
T: Uh -huh. In the red car :  
S: En el auto rojo .  
T: Good. How would y ou say I have bought a red car? What is the verb to buy ?  
S: Comprer .  
T: Comprar .  
S: Comprar . Comprar .  
T: Comprar .  
T: So I have bought a red car , and let's use auto .  I have bought a red car:   
S: He comprado un auto rojo .  
T: Good. He comprado un,  (masculi ne word), un, un auto rojo . How would you say I have bought 
myself a red car ?  
S: Me he comprado un auto rojo .T: Me he comprado un auto rojo . I have bought myself a red car . Very good.