Track 28  
T: Spanish dialects don't change very much. Slang changes a lot, but Spanish is pretty standard. It's 
not like Arabic for example, where you have such a different Arabic in Morocco to Egypt, for 
example. All of the different Spanishes are completely mutually intelligible. But in slang, you get 
many differ ent terms and words and car is one of these words that have different versions. Money  
is another one. You might hear dinero , which is like the standard word; you might hear plata , 
which actually means silver; pasta  you might hear pasta , that's one they  use that in Spain. So we 
had a few words for car. Do you remember any of them?  
S: Máquina , auto , caro.  
T: Carro . Two r's. Let's stay with carro . How would you say the car ?  
S: El carro .  
T: El carro . And how would you say, a car ?  
S: Un carro .  
T: Un carro . Good. So it's a masculine word, and we use el for the, and un for a. What if we say, the 
cars?  
S: Los carros .  
T: Good. Los carros . So the plural of el is los. It's a little bit different, el to los. The word for expensive  
is caro . So it 's like carro , but with one r. Caro .  
S: Caro .  
T: So again it's a nice bit to feel the difference between having the single r and the double r, just as 
we saw in pero , meaning but and perro  meaning dog. So how would you say, the car is expensive ?  
S: El carro es caro .  
T: Good. El carro es caro . Good. So es we said was it is, she is, he is or just is. Or you are , talking 
to usted . Talking formally. So if you just wanted to say it is expensive :  
S: Es caro .T: Good. And what if you were talking about a f eminine thing?  
S: Es cara .  
T: Es cara . And when I say feminine thing I really mean a feminine noun. If you're referring in your 
mind to a feminine noun, because if you, in your country, call cars máquinas , then you're going 
to say es cara . But if you cal l them autos,  then you're going to say es caro . So it refers to the word 
more than the object, to the noun, the gender of the noun. So es we have for is, and for they are , 
or you guys are - we know they always come together - we have son. Son. S-o-n.  
S: Son.  
T: Son. So if you want to say the cars are expensive , and we will use carro  again. So the cars are 
expensive :  
S: Los carros son caro - caros .  
T: Good. Los carros son caros . Good. What if you use a feminine word like máquina , how's it going 
to be? The cars are expensive :  
S: Las máquinas son caras .  
T: Good. Las máquinas son caras . And the car is expensive : Using again máquina .  
S: La máquina es caro  - cara.  
T: Good. La máquina es cara . The word teacher  in Spanish is professor . Profesor .  
S: Profeso r.  
T: Profesor . So how would you say, he is a professor ? And we don't need to say “a”, we can just say 
he is professor.   
S: Es profesor .  
T: Good. Es profesor . What if you wanted to say, she is a professor ? What do you think might 
happen?  
S: Es profe sora?T: Good. Es profesora . What if you wanted to say, they are teachers , and you mean a group of 
females?  
S: Son profesoras .  
T: Son profesoras . Good. So, this is a noun, profesor . It's a word you can put the or a in front of. 
Now, we said that adjecti ves, they change for gender if they end in -o. If they don't, they don't.  
For example, the global situation  was:  
S: La global situación .  
T: Where does that global  go?  
S: La situación global .  
T: La situación global . So situación  is feminine, but we're not saying “ globala ”. Adjectives, these 
describing words that we can put is in front of, they only change if they end in -o. But nouns, they 
can change to feminine like profesor/profesora  to differentiate. So this is why it's important to 
know what type of  word we're dealing with. We're doing this already, but we don't even realize it. 
The moment we come in contact with a verb, we know exactly what to do. We know it's a verb, 
and we know how to manage it. We don't start trying to make a verb masculine or fe minine, for 
example. So we are already making this differentiation, but we want to do it more consciously to 
get more control. So this is a noun. Doctor , what do you think that means?  
S: Doctor .  
T: Good. Is it a noun, is it an adjective, is it a verb? Wh at is it?  
S: Noun.  
T: Noun. So how do you think feminine, a female doctor, will be?  
S: Doctora ?  
T: Good. Doctora . We just stick an a. Good. So how would you say he is a doctor ?  
S: Es doctor .  
T: Good. She is a doctor :S: Es doctora .  
T: Good. Now, if you want to get the plural of professor , profesor , or doctor , doctor , or any other 
word in Spanish that ends in a consonant, you don't add s; you add -es. so how do you think it 
would sound, the plural of profesor ?  
S: Profesores .  
T: Good. Profesores . So this is the plural for masculine or for mixed. The plural for feminine:  
S: Profesoras .  
T: Good. So how would you say they are professors ? And you mean a masculine or mixed group.  
S: Son profesores .  
T: Good. Son profesores . And if they were all fem ale?  
S: Son profesoras .  
T: Good. They are doctors : mixed or masculine:  
S: Son doctores .  
T: Good. Son doctores . What if they were females?  
S: Son doctoras .  
T: Good. Son doctoras . Good. Words ending -ive in English, i-v-e, tend to become -ivo, i-v-o for 
masculine singular. This is the one we always start from though and build from, this masculine 
singular, or neuter let's say. So for example addictive  becomes adictivo . Now when I say neuter, 
we don't really have a neuter in Spanish, we have masculi ne and feminine. But the concept of 
neuter exists. For example , if I say  it's addictive , and I'm referring to living in the mountains, is 
addictive ; eating  health ily is addictive  or something like this, then I use the masculin e singular.  
So how would you say it's addictive ?  
S: Es adictivo .  
T: Good. Es adictivo . How would you say he is positive ?S: Es positivo .  
T: Good. And you pronounced an s where  most English speakers will probably find themselves 
pronouncing a z there because in English we have positive , so that would probably transfer into 
Spanish to /pozitivo / and we want to be careful not to do that. Positivo  with an s. Positivo. She is 
positive :  
S: Es positiva .  
T: Good. They are positive :  
S: Son posi tivos .  
T: Good. They are intuitive :  
S: Son intuitivos .  
T: Good. Son intuitivos . What if you meant women?  
S: Intuitivas .  
T: Good. Son intuitivas . She is very attractive : The word for very is muy , and it's spelled m-u-y.  
The y you can imagine it like a n i. Muy .  
S: Muy .  
T: Good. So she is very attractive :  
S: Es muy atractivo - oh, atractiva .  
T: Atractiva .  
S: Es muy atractiva .  
T: Good. Atractiva  is showing us that it refers to a female. So this would probably help us work out 
who we are talking about . But, maybe we would want to say, to clarify or to emphasize or to 
contrast. So how would you say that, using the word for she? She is very attractive :  
S: I always get confused on that, if it's el or if it's la or ella.T: So I want you to spend some time to think about it, and not guess. Think about which is which, 
make a decision.  
S: Her is la.  
T: Good.  
S: Ella es muy atractiva .  
T: Good. Ella es muy atractiva . How would you say, she is very creative ?  
S: Ella es muy creativa .  
T: But, she's a ggressive :  
S: Pero , es, is it “aggressiva”? I was thinking of the double g, does it stay?  
T: Well these random double letters that we don't need in English really, they just become single 
letters in Spanish. So I think there's a double s there as well in English, well that would also become 
singular. The only double letters that cross over are the r's and the n's. Like connotación .  
S: Oh double n's.  
T: “Con -notación”. If you get a double f, double s, double g, these random double letters you get in 
English; they don't cross over into Spanish.  
How would you say, they are aggressive,  talking about a masculine or mixed group?  
S: Son agresivos .  
T: Good. And what if you wanted to use the word for they?  
S: Ellos son agresivos .  
T: Good. How would you say , he is negative ?  
S: Es negativo .  
T: Good, and if you use the word for he?  
S: Él es negativo .  
T: Good. He is very negative :S: Es muy negativo .  
T: How would you say, It's intensive ?  
S: Es intensivo .  
T: Good. So we use the neuter there, we don't  know what we're talking about. So we can just use the 
masculine singular, which is also like neuter. Es intensivo . How would you say, they are natives ?  
S: Son nativos .  
T: Good. Son nativos . And what if it was a female group?  
S: Son nativas .  
T: Very good.