Track 29  
T: So I want to talk about something now that's different in Spanish. And first I want to speak about 
what this means; rather than an obstacle to learning, it's part of the experience of learning a new 
language which can make you realize t hat in your own language you are both permitted and obliged 
to perceive and express the world in a certain way. There's two important , kind of contradictory 
concepts here almost. It permits you and obliges you, it allows you and requires you, to perceive 
and to express the world in a certain way. So, in Spanish we have two verbs for to be . So remember 
to be  is is, am, are ; we get all of this from to be . We don't say I be; we say I am. So we have ser. 
This is where es comes from; this is where son comes fro m. And ser is about characteristics. When 
we refer to the characteristics of something. Actually un ser  is a being . We said that some form of 
the verb is often the noun; here it's the complete form. Un ser  is a being . Un ser humano is what?  
S: A human bei ng.  
T: A human being . And we could have found humano , even though there's no rule to find humano , 
that word, we have humanity . The words with -ity end how in Spanish?  
S: Humanidad .  
T: Humanidad . And then we can probably guess then that human  is humano. Un ser humano is a 
human being . So ser refers to things that are characteristic of something. Then estar , which is the 
other to be , estar,  refers to states - states we are in. The word state  is related to estar . So Spanish 
permits us, allows us, but also o bliges us, when we are perceiving and expressing the world around 
us, to make a decision  and to think about something. Is this a state, or is it a characteristic? So this 
kind of sounds very abstract right now, so let's look at some examples. To be ti red: do you think 
this is a state? Or do you think it's a characteristic of you, to be tired? Is it a state you're in, or is it 
a characteristic of you?  
S: It's a state.  
T: Good. Where you are: is it a state you are in or is it a characteristic of y ou? Where you are.  
S: A state.  
T: A state. To be a good or a bad person: do you think this is a characteristic of you or a state?S: Characteristic.  
T: Characteristic. So it's very very important to kind of snub out now any temptation that you might  
have to simplify this to temporary and permanent. This is what most learners do, and actually what 
many teachers do: simplify this concept to temporary and permanent. Which, if you think about it 
this way, will work most of the time, but not all of the ti me. We want to think in this way, is it a 
state or is it a  characteristic? For example if I say I am a student , it's not very permanent is it? But 
is it a  state or a characteristic? My profession or my occupation.  
S: It should be a  state you're in.  
T: It's temporary but that doesn't make it a state. Your profession, according to Spanish, is 
characteristic of you. Even if you do it for five minutes.  
S: I guess it's the same, for example, as you said before with the word aggressive . Someone can be 
aggre ssive and they can change, so that stops it from being permanent. But it's still a characteristic.  
T: Exactly. And we will see actually some adjectives we can use with both ser and estar  to give 
different meanings. But the great bulk of them go with one o r the other. This is Spanish 
conceptually deciding whether it's a characteristic or a state; forcing us to make this differentiation  
and to express it. Let's look at the forms, lets look at the forms of estar  to begin. Now I am from 
estar  is estoy. Estoy.  So it ends -oy. We already saw another verb that ends -oy which is voy: I go 
or I'm going . Estoy .  
S: Estoy .  
T: Estoy . Now to be  is a very irregular verb in most languages. Look at English: from to be  we get 
am, is, are, was . But this is actually not so irregular. We have this little irregularity -oy, estoy .  
S: Estoy .  
T: And the other irregularity that we have is that this verb is the only verb in the entire Spanish 
language that doesn't have the accent on the penultimate syllable in the present  tense. So it's not 
“éstoy” it's estoy ; the accent is on the ending. This hasn't happened until now, and it won't happen 
again. So we have estar  and from estar  we have estoy . Now, all of the other forms are regular. 
We build them how we would expect to, wi th the exception that the accent will be on the lastsyllable. And it's the only verb in the entire present tense that has this characteristic. So how would 
you say he is / she is / it is / you are , from estar , using estar ?  
S: Está .  
T: Está . They  or for  you guys :  
S: Están .  
T: Good. And make it for you (informal ):  
S: Estás .  
T: Good. And for the “ we” version, the accent is where it should be because we're adding two 
syllables. So give me the “ we” version.  
S: Estamos .  
T: Estamos . So that's it, that's your set. Estoy, está, están, estás, estamos . The word for tired  is 
cansado, cansado.   
S: Cansado .  
T: C-a-n-s-a-d-o. Cansado .  
S: Cansado .  
T: Good. So how would you say, I am tired ? This is a state.  
S: Estoy cansada .  
T: Good.  
S: Estoy cansada .  
T: Estoy cansada . Good. We are tired , talking about a mixed or a masculine group?  
S: Estamos cansados .  
T: Good. Estamos cansados . What if you are an all female group?  
S: Estamos cansadas .T: Good. Now the word for always  we said was siempre . Siempre . Now if you say, I'm always tired , 
because tired  as an adjective, as an idea, is a state, not a characteristic, because we are looking at 
that whether it's a state or a characteristic, rather than is it permanent or is it temporary, we're using 
estar . So even if you say I'm always tired  it doesn't matter, you still use estar . So siempre  is very 
flexible in this sentence, you can put it anywhere. The emphasis is going to change when you move 
it, but it's legal anywhere. So how would you say, I'm always ti red?  
S: Estoy cansada siempre .  
T: Good. Estoy cansada siempre . Estoy siempre cansada . Siempre estoy cansada . Or I would say 
cansado . Good. So we want to resist the temptation to simplify this concept to “temporary” and 
“permanent”. We want to ask ourse lf “is it a state, or is it a characteristic ?” To be tired : is it a state 
or is it a characteristic? If we simplify it to temporary and permanent , most of the time it's going 
to work, this simplification. But many times we're going to feel frustrated, f eeling like there's 
something we don't understand because Spanish disagrees with us. If we have the concepts of 
characteristic and state, the few times Spanish disagrees with what we consider a characteristic  
and state it's going to be an interesting poin t of perspective. For example, muerto .  
Which means:  
S: Dead .  
T: Dead . Good. We looked at this briefly before as a part of mortgage , meaning death -pact. Muerto , 
in Spanish, is a state. Death is a state. So if you want to say I'm dead , you would use estar . So how 
would you say that?  
S: Estoy muerta .  
T: Good. Estoy muerta . And I would say estoy muerto . And you can use it to say, I'm very tired  as 
well. Estoy muerta , estoy muerto . I'm very tired.  Good.