Track 3  
T: So what was is or he is, she is , it is?  
S: Es.  
T: Es. Good, we can use this with some other convertible words as well to make sentences. Another 
rule for these conver tible words is that words in English that end -ant or -ent, most of them we can 
just stick an e on the end and they become Spanish. So for example , important  becomes 
importante . Importante . Where is the stress there?  
S: In the second last .   
T: Good. The stress is as much part of the word as the sounds, which is why we want to get into the 
habit of just processing where is the accent, not trying to memorize it, just looking where it is.  
Not trying to memorize it, just oberserving it.  How would you say it is important ?  
S: Es importante.   
T: Es importante . It's not important:   
S: No es importante .  
T: No es importante . How would you say different ?  
S: Diferente ?  
T: Diferente . It's not different:   
S: No es diferente.   
T: Good, no es dif erente.  How would you say constant ? Constant:   
S: Constante.   
T: Yeah, constante . How would you say it is constant ?  
S: Es constante.   
T: Es constante . If you add on -mente , -mente , this sound you get: -ly in English. If you want to say 
constantly  you can say constantemente , and it's one word, constantemente.S: Constantemente.   
T: Good, so how would you say legally ?  
S: Legalmente.   
T: Perfect, legalmente . Good, Illegally:   
S: Ilegalmente.   
T: Ilegalmente.  How do you think you say real in Spanish? Real:   
S: Real.   
T: Real . Good, when we have an r at the beginning you might hear it like a rolling r. Real . How do 
you think you would say really ?  
S: Realmente.   
T: Realmente . Real  also means royal. Like Real Madrid  is not, you know, real Madrid , it's Royal 
Madrid . How would you say normally ?  
S: Normalmente.   
T: Good, normalmente . So what would it mean if I said to you normalmente es importante ?  
Normalmente es importante , what does that mean?  
S: Normally , as in usually, it's important .  
T: Very good, this is true. You actually use normally  like usually . Normalmente es importante .  
Now if we have a /j/ sound, a /j/ sound, in a convertible word so we're not working with the letter 
g, we're working with the sound here, we're thinking about the sound. If we ha ve a /j/ sound in a 
convertible word, this /j/ is going to become /kh/ in Spanish. Now if you know how to say 
Argentina  for example in Spanish, Argentina , if you've heard that anywhere, this is a good hook 
to remember this rule. If we have a /j/ sound it 's going to become /kh/ as a sound. This doesn't 
mean any g. For example how would you say global ?  
S: Global.   
T: Global . Globally:S: Globalmente.   
T: Globalmente . So it's not a g, it's the /j/ sound. General  is going to become?  
S: General.   
T: Very good, general . So we're causing a bit of friction in the throat, general . Generally:   
S: Generalmente.   
T: Generalmente.  Good. Original:   
S: Original.   
T: Original . Originally:   
S: Originalmente.   
T: Good, originalmente.  Digital:   
S: Digital.   
T: Digital . Good, naturally:   
S: Naturalmente.  
T: Good. How would you say naturally it's original ?  
S: Naturalmente es original.   
T: Good. So naturalmente , you can also use it a little bit like obviously , something like that. Words 
ending -ible or -able, we can also convert many of them. We just have to pronounce them syllable 
by syllable and put the accent second from the end. So possible  becomes posible .  
S: Posible.   
T: Probable:   
S: Probable ?  
T: Yeah, probable . How would you say probably ?  
S: Probablemente.T: Y eah, probablemente . Possibly:   
S: Posiblemente.   
T: Good. Possibly it's original:   
S: Posiblemente es original.   
T: Good. Posiblemente es original . Flexible:   
S: Flexible.   
T: Flexible.  Good. So you can't do this - like if you say doable for example, you k now. It's when the 
-able or -ible is really part of the word you will probably be able to do this. Some of these rules 
are more useful than others, some of these rules have more exceptions than others. We want to just 
get in the habit of identifying them a nd then getting this sense of what words in English are from 
Latin, and which ones we can experiment with converting over to Spanish. Now, this gives us over 
3,000 words, and there are enough words to be very conversational. So we want to feel free to 
experiment with the vocabulary, but at the same time we don't want to feel restricted by the fact 
that we might find an exception or we might use one that doesn't work. And feeling comfortable 
about that possibility of making that error is what really allows y ou to learn quickly.  
Because with this experimentation, you find very quickly the words that you can use.