Track 32  
T: The word for boring  or bored  is aburrido . Aburrido .  
S: Aburrido .  
T: A-b-u-r-r-i-d-o. Aburrido .  
S: Aburrido .  
T: Now this is boring  or bored . One o f these words in English is a characteristic and the other one is 
a state. Which is which? Boring , if I say you are boring , is it a state or a characteristic?  
S: Characteristic.  
T: And if I say you are bored , is it a state or a characteristic?  
S: A stat e.  
T: A state. So in English we have two different words to express this difference whereas in Spanish 
you will just decide whether you are going to use ser or estar . So, you will have to think about it. 
How will you say, it is boring ?  
S: Es aburrido .  
T: Es aburrido . Good. He is bored , is it a characteristic or a state?  
S: A state.  
T: Good. So, he is bored :  
S: Está aburrido .  
T: Está aburrido . But he is boring :  
S: Es aburrido .  
T: Good. And she is boring :  
S: Es aburrido . Oh sorry, ella es aburrido .  
T: Spanish is more subtle than that.S: Es aburrida .  
T: Es aburrida . They are boring :  
S: Son aburridos .  
T: Son aburridos . They are bored :  
S: Están aburridos .  
T: Good. Están aburridos . So with some adjectives we get a different meaning depending on  whether 
we use ser or estar . The word for from  in Spanish is de. From  or of, de. De.  
S: De.  
T: We get this forming part of many Latin -English words, for example, deliver . The de- of deliver  is 
actually from . -liver is to do with freedom, like liberat ion, liberación . How would you say to 
liberate ?  
S: Liberar .  
T: Good. Libre  is free in Spanish. So again we see this grey area between v and b, between English 
and Spanish, between libre  and -liver in deliver  just as we did between savvy  and saber  for 
example, so deliver  is like from  or of freeing , which has much more sense if you look at the original 
meanings of deliver , like to deliver a baby , deliver me from evil , rather than to deliver a package , 
which is a much more modern meaning. You can see much more the ideology in the vocabulary 
with the older uses. Another interesting word that we can see this de in, in English, is decipher  for 
example. Decipher  is actually a combination of Arabic and Latin. You have de meaning of or from , 
and “cipher” from “s ifr” which means zero in Arabic. So to decipher  is to go from zero , or 
something like this. So anyway we have de for from  or of. Now, if I want to ask, where is he from?  
Is it a characteristic or a state, where you are from ?  
S: A characteristic.  
T: Yes , it's not where you are, it's where you are from, this is characteristic of you. So in Spanish we 
are going to say, from where are you, from where is he, from where is she ? This is the word order.  
So, from where  is what?S: De dónde .  
T: De dónde . From where is he? From where are you (formal) ? et cetera?  
S: ¿De dónde es ?  
T: ¿De dónde es ? And you informal . You remember how was you are , you informal. It's kind of 
similar to es:  
S: ¿De dónde eres ?  
T: ¿De dónde eres ? So this sentence actually wil l help you remember this kind of irregular form eres 
because you will hear it all the time. ¿De dónde eres ? From where are you, where are you from ? 
How would you say, where are they from? :  
S: ¿De dónde son ?  
T: ¿De dónde son ? But if you want to a sk, where are they?  Their location, where are they ? How 
would you ask?  
S: ¿Dónde están ?  
T: Good, ¿ Donde están ? Because now we refer to a state. Good. So, we have this adjective as well, 
libre , like in deliver  and liberation , libre , which means free. Again, we might mean a state or we 
might mean a characteristic. Now sometimes, to show the difference, we might not just use ser 
and estar , we might actually also change the way we say it. So for example, if you want to say I 
am free , and you mean from your exams, from work, do you think you mean a state or a 
characteristic?  
S: A state.  
T: A state. So how would you say that, I am free ?  
S: Estoy libre .  
T: Good. Estoy libre . And libre  does not change for masculine and feminine because it ends e. Only 
adjec tives ending o will change. Estoy libre . Good. Now if you mean as a characteristic, as a 
characteristic of your personality, you are a free person , then you might say:  
S: Soy libre .T: Soy libre . You might also say, I am a free person . So person  is perso na, and you could say, I am 
a - what's a person ?  
S: Una persona .  
T: Good. I am a free person :  
S: Soy una persona libre .  
T: Good. Soy una persona libre . Persona  is feminine, not because of you, because the word is 
feminine. So I, as a male, would also s ay, soy una persona libre . So it's the noun in itself, persona , 
that is feminine. So in this case, with libre , there's no problem to move between ser and estar . 
You can use libre  with ser or with estar  to give slightly different meanings. So some adjective s 
you will be able to move between ser and estar  and others you won't. If you want to get around 
that uncertainty, instead of trying out soy libre you could just say soy una persona libre , and then 
because persona  is going with soy, because what you are sa ying in fact is, I am a person , soy una 
persona , then you know you are safe. Also, different Spanish dialects can have different ideas 
about what should go with ser and what should go with estar . So for example, casado , which 
means married , not cansado , casado , comes from casa, which literally means housed . When you 
are married  you are housed . Casado , in some places they use with ser and in some places they use 
with estar . They can't agree on whether being married is a characteristic or a st ate. If you want to 
avoid this insecurity about it you can say, soy una persona casada , and then you know that 
persona  is going with soy, so whatever then describes persona  is not important. Persona  goes 
with soy. When you say I am a person , then that is c haracteristic. Let's explore this idea a little 
more. Busy  in Spanish is occupied , ocupado . Ocupado .  
S: Ocupado .  
T: Good. How do you say, I am busy ?  
S: Estoy ocupada .  
T: Estoy ocupada . Or I would say, estoy ocupado . Now, if I want to say, I am a busy  person , then 
with this adjective, actually, I can't switch to soy, and say soy ocupado . That's bad Spanish. But 
you as a Spanish learner, how are you supposed to know that? So, you can use persona  as a safetynet, in the sense of I am a busy person , and t hen you're sure it's perfect Spanish. So how would 
you say I am a busy person ?  
S: Soy una persona ocupada .  
T: Good. Soy una persona ocupada . So that's a characteristic, because what you are actually saying 
is, I am a person , and much more characteristi c than that you can't get. So, estoy ocupado , as a 
state, and then soy una persona ocupada , characteristic, males or females  would say persona 
ocupada . Ocupada  refers to persona , not to the speaker, so I would also say, soy una persona 
ocupada . How would you say, we are busy ?  
S: Estamos ocupados .  
T: Estamos ocupados . But if you wanted to say, we are busy people :  
S: Somos personas ocupadas .  
T: Good. Somos personas ocupadas . To be worried  is to be preoccupied . So how do you think that 
would sound?  
S: Preocupado .  
T: Preocupado . I am worried :  
S: Estoy preocupada .  
T: Good. He is worried :  
S: Está preocupado .  
T: Good. He is a worried person . He is worried as a characteristic. He is worryful :  
S: Es una persona preocupada .  
T: Good. Es una persona  preocupada .