Track 33  
T: So some adjectives will exclusively go with estar . Some adjectives will exclusively go with ser. 
Some adjectives can go with either ser or estar , and change their meaning, like aburrido , meaning 
bored  as a state, or boring  as a characteristic, just changing depending on whether it goes with ser 
or estar . Another example of a word like this is listo. Listo .  
S: Listo .  
T: Now listo, when it comes with estar , means ready . So how would you say I am ready ?  
S: Estoy listo , or lista, in my case.  
T: Estoy lista , or listo. How would you say, we are ready ?  
S: Estamos listos .  
T: Good. And what if we were a female group?  
S: Estamos listas .  
T: Estamos listas . And what if we wanted to emphasize We are ready :  
S: Somos , no,  
T: You m ake it a characteristic and it's more emphatic...  
S: Nosotros -  
T: It's a very interesting idea .  
S: It's what you said when I go too fast. So it's nosotros estamos listas .  
T: There's a contradiction there.  
S: Nosotras estamos listas .  
T: Yes. All-female group: nosotras estamos listas , or male or mixed group: nosotros estamos listos . 
So, to be listo, to be ready as a characteristic, means to be smart  in Spanish. So this is one of the 
words that we can use with ser or estar  and the meaning changes. So, estoy listo : I am ready . Soy 
listo: I am smart . So if you want to say, he is smart,  he is smart,  how would you say it?S: Es listo .  
T: Es listo . She is smart :  
S: Es lista .  
T: Good. You are smart , speaking informally, to a woman? If you forgot th e you are you can think of 
where are you from ? That might help you trigger it. De dónde -  
S: Eres. Eres lista .  
T: Good. You are very smart:   
S: Eres muy lista .  
T: Good. The word for so, like I am so bored or I am so tired , is tan. T-a-n. Tan.  
S: Tan.  
T: So how would you say, I am so tired ?  
S: Estoy tan cansado. Cansada .  
T: Good. Estoy tan cansado . Estoy tan cansada . Good. How would you say, I am so bored ?  
S: Estoy tan aburrida .  
T: Good. Estoy tan aburrido , aburrida . How would you say, he is so bored ?  
S: Él está tan aburrido .  
T: Good. Está tan aburrido , or Él está tan aburrido . Now how would you say, it is so boring,  it is 
so boring. So boring , not bored. Boring .  
S: Es tan aburrido .  
T: Good. Es tan aburrido . The word for good  in Span ish is bueno . We've mentioned this before. We 
have in English Bon Appetit which is of course French, but we say it in English, and you can see 
the o of bon appetit splitting to become bueno  in Spanish. Now the meaning of bueno  changes as 
well between ser and estar . If you are talking about it is, the change is a kind of change in feeling. 
Es bueno, está bueno : a small change in feeling which really depends on dialect so we won't lookat it too much here, we'll just listen. But if you refer to people, in mos t dialects, if we use ser, we 
get the meaning of “to be a good person” or “to be good at something”. So if you want to say, they 
are good , and you mean “they are good people”, or that they are good at something, how would 
you say it?  
S: Son buenos .  
T: Son buenos . He is good :  
S: Es bueno .  
T: Es bueno . Now if you use estar , it will sound like he is attractive. He is in good form . So bueno 
with estar , if we are talking about people, then gives you this meaning. So how would you say 
that? He is good, meanin g attractive, in good form :  
S: Está bueno .  
T: Está bueno . So, you see that you can have many different changes in shade of meaning between 
ser and estar . So other than the fact that we are being permitted and obliged to perceive and express 
the world in a certain way by Spanish, which is very interesting in itself, we also get the opportunity 
to use these different nuances between ser and estar  and when you really get your head around it, 
which is just through listening and observing and seeing how people  are using it, you will probably 
feel that it's missing in English. That sometimes in English you might want to clarify, not estar  
but es, and you can't do it. So you realize that Spanish gives you a tool to relate to reality that in 
this case, English doe sn't give you. And this is one of the most fascinating and exciting things 
about language learning. Not an obstacle to speaking the language, we don't want to see it like this, 
oh every time I use to be I have to think about this “characteristic or state” business. No, we want 
to look at it from the other angle, about what it offers us. How would you say, I want to know how 
he is,  and we mean, I want to know, how is he doing ?  
S: Quiero saber cómo es .  
T: How is he doing :  
S: Oh. Cómo está .T: Good. Quie ro saber cómo está . Now what would it mean, quiero saber  cómo es ? What would 
that mean?  
S: How he is. What he's like .  
T: Exactly. I want to know what he's like . Good. Another adjective you can use with ser or estar  is 
feliz. What do you think feliz migh t mean?  
S: Happy .  
T: And how do you know that?  
S: Feliz navidad .  
T: Oh okay! Happy Christmas . Feliz navidad.  But is there some connection in English that might 
have helped you as well? Did you hear felicity  in English?  
S: Yes.  
T: How would felicity  be in Spanish?  
S: Felicidad .  
T: Felicidad . Which means happiness . Happiness . So feliz, happy . So feliz can also go with ser or 
estar  to give the meaning of I am happy or I am a happy person . So we don't need to say I am a 
happy person , we can just use ser. So like I said there's no real way for you to know that other 
than listening. If you wanted to play safe, and say, literally, I am a happy person , it would not be 
at all incorrect. So, firstly, how do you say, I am happy , as a state?  
S: Estoy feliz .  
T: Estoy feliz . Now, I am happy , and you mean as a characteristic :  
S: Soy feliz .  
T: Soy feliz . So this is fine. You can do this, but there is no real way for you to know whether feliz is 
an adjective that is flexible enough to be used with ser and estar . It really depends on the adjective 
itself, the word itself, rather than the meaning in many cases. So, with that insecurity, and wanting 
to give the meaning, you could have just said, I am a happy person , and then you don't have to 
worry about it. So how would you say that?S: Soy una persona feliz .  
T: Good. Soy una persona feliz . And that's also perfect Spanish. So there you could have said soy 
feliz or soy una persona feliz . So to really get our heads around ser and estar  it's important to 
listen activ ely, and to notice and see how people are using ser and estar , and making our own 
conclusions as to why, working with this base of state and characteristic. It's a process of listening, 
and the more you get intimate with this idea, it offers you a great ra nge of expression that you don't 
have in English and you should really enjoy it.