Track 34  
T: To speak . Do you remember how to say to speak ? It begins with the silent h.  
S: Hablar .  
T: Hablar . Good. What is I speak  or I am speaking ?  
S: Hablo .  
T: Hablo . Good. And what was to sleep , or to be dormant  let’s say ?  
S: Dormir .  
T: Dormir . And how do you say I sleep ?  
S: Duermo .  
T: Good. We said also that you can get the additional meaning of I fall asleep  by saying I sleep myself:   
S: Me duermo.   
T: Me duermo . Good. To eat  was:  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . Good. So I eat or I am eating is :  
S: Como .  
T: Como . So here the o doesn’t split. Good. To have breakfast, to have breakfast , we don’t say in 
Spanish to have  breakfast . We have a verb to breakfast,  let’s say, and the verb to breakfast  is 
desayunar, desayunar .  
S: Desayunar .  
T: Breakfast  and desayunar  are direct translations of each other in fact. I don’t know if you noticed 
that in English breakfast  is “break fast”. When we have breakfast we break the fa st. And in Spanish 
“des” is like un, ayunar  is to fast . So to “un -fast”. So desayunar  is like to “un -fast”, to “break 
fast”. Desayunar .  
S: Desayunar .T: To have breakfast. I'm having breakfast  or I have breakfast:   
S: Desayuno .  
T: Desayuno . And desayuno  is also the noun. El desayuno  is the breakfast . What was to wait  or to 
hope ? Desperate  is related because again we have this “des” like in desayunar  which is like “un-
hoped ” or “un -hopeful”  is to be desperate . So to wait  or to hope :  
S: Esperar .  
T: Good . Esperar . Good. What is I wait  or I am waiting  or I hope  or I am hoping ?  
S: Espero .  
T: Espero . So we’ve been giving the verbs two translations in the present tense. I speak or I am 
speaking , I go or I am going , I wait or I am waiting . This is because this –ing tense in English we 
really overuse it. For example we use this –ing in English to refer to the future: He is doing it 
tomorrow , whereas in Spanish we just use the present tense with that future context. Lo hace 
mañana . Which is why we need to giv e both translations for hace , for example. He makes or does  
or he is making or doing . And we translate hablo  as I speak  and I am speaking . But this doesn’t 
mean that I am speaking  doesn’t exist. It does exist but we use it in Spanish only when we want to 
show what we are doing right now in this moment. So, beginning this structure I am speaking , this 
I am: do you think that you would choose ser for characteristics, or do you think that you would 
choose estar  for states?  
S: It’s a state so estoy .  
T: Go od. We will use estar  because of course what we are doing is a state. So we will always use 
estar  with these structures. So the first part of this sentence is estoy . Now to get speaking,  –ing, 
from to speak  we take off –r and we add –ando , -ando . And we g et hablando .  
S: Hablando .  
T: So, I’m speaking :  
S: Estoy hablando .T: Estoy hablando . Good. So maybe somebody interrupts you and you won’t say hablo , you will 
say estoy hab lando . How would you say I am waiting  and you mean right now? Right now, I am 
waiting here, I am waiting here :  
S: Estoy esperando aquí.  
T: Estoy esperando aquí. Good. So you could say espero aquí . Maybe it would sound a little more 
like I'll wait here  rather than I am waiting here  but both are fine. In many situations both ar e fine 
and there will be just a slight change in meaning. Espero aquí , estoy esperando aquí . What you 
can’t do is say I am eating  with her  tomorrow . The –ing, you need to use it just for what you are 
doing right now. So how was to speak ?  
S: Hablar .  
T: And how would you say I speak  or I am speaking ?  
S: Hablo .  
T: Hablo . And what was to prepare ? If you forgot  it you can go from preparation .  
S: Preparación,  Preparar .  
T: And I prepare  or I am preparing :  
S: Preparo .  
T: Good. So how wou ld you say I am preparing it tomorrow ?  
S: Lo preparo mañana .  
T: Lo preparo mañana . So if you want to show, if you want to emphasize that we are doing 
something right now, I am preparing , firstly if we divide that up into two bits : I am - preparing :  
S: Estoy.   
T: Estoy . Good. Preparar  becomes?  
S: Preparando .  
T: Good. So how would you say I am preparing ?S: Estoy preparando .  
T: Good. Estoy preparando . Good. So that’s if you want to say I am preparing it right now , you can 
use this structure. So how would you say I am preparing it ?  
S: Lo estoy preparando .  
T: Lo estoy preparando  or Estoy prepar ándolo . Even though it’s a changed verb here we can have 
the lo after –ando . Estoy prepar ándolo or lo estoy preparando . We said that to hav e breakfast  
was desayunar , desayunar . So how would you say we are having breakfast  and you mean right 
now?  
S: Estamos desayunando .  
T: -ando . Good. Estamos desayunando . So, for –ar verbs we take of f the –ar and we put –ando  and 
we get this tense to show  what we are doing right now. And we are not going to use it as we do in 
English: I'm finding out tomorrow  and I'm doing it next week , I'm preparing it later . How would 
you say I'm preparing it later ?  
S: Estoy preparando -  
T: This is not how we use it. So in Spanish we only use it to describe what we're doing right now.  
S: Right. Sorry.  
T: So this is why we are giving preparo , for example, the translation of both I prepare  and I am 
preparing . So that when we want to say things like I am preparing i t later , we don’t go to estoy 
preparando .  
S: Lo preparo más tarde .  
T: Lo preparo más tarde . Good. But if you wanted to give the meaning of I am preparing it right 
now,  how would you say it ?  
S: Estoy prepar ándolo .  
T: Good. Estoy prepar ándolo  or lo estoy preparando . And there you get the meaning of right now 
in this moment . Good. So for –ar verbs we are taking off the –ar and we are putting –ando  to getthis –ing. For –er, –ir verbs we take off the –er or the –ir and we put on -iendo , -iendo , i-e-n-d-o, 
to get this –ing form. So how would you get eating  from to eat ? How would eating  be from comer ?  
S: Comiendo .  
T: Good. So how would you say I am eating , and you mean right now?  
S: Estoy comiendo .  
T: Estoy comiendo . Good. I am eating . And how would you say he is eating  or she is eating  or you 
formal?  
S: Está comiendo .  
T: Good. Está comiendo . So maybe somebody calls you and they say Can I speak to Pablo? , and 
you say Está comiendo , you mean right now. What was to sell ? You can think of vending machine .  
S: Vender .  
T: Vender . Good. How would you say: They sell it, they sell it ?  
S: Venden . Lo venden .  
T: Lo venden . Good. How would you say they are selling it tomorrow  or they will sell it tomorrow ?  
S: Lo venden manaña .  
T: Lo venden mañana . Good. Now if you want to say they are selling it right now,  and you want to 
give that meaning “right now” how would it be?  
S: Están vendi éndolo .  
T: Good. Están vendi éndolo  or lo están vendiendo . Good.