Track 35  
T: So going back to ser and estar , and the difference between ser and estar , how would you say 
sincerity  in Spanish? Sincerity:   
S: Is it sinceridad ?  
T: It is. Sinceridad . So if you had to guess, what is sincere  in Spanish, what would you gue ss?  
S: Sencero .  
T: Sincero .  
S: Sincero .  
T: Sincero . Good. So there's no rule for this, but if we have sincerity  becoming sinceridad , we can 
guess that sincere  will be very similar in Spanish and we can play around and try to find it. Sincero . 
Good. So do you think to be sincere  is a state or a characteristic?  
S: It can be both, depending on the situation.  
T: Indeed, but if you look at the concept, the concept of sincere  - because this is how Spanish decides 
it - the concept of sincere , is it a state o r a characteristic to be sincere ?  
S: Well if it's, generally  it's a characteristic, but if someone, we're talking about that moment that 
someone is saying something, then in that moment, they're being, they're in that state of being 
sincere.  
T: You 're right, and our usage, and that's what we're going to look at now, can get around that, but 
Spanish is not looking at the use. It's looking just at the concept by itself, so sincerity , is it a 
characteristic or is it a state?  
S: It's a characteristic.  
T: Good. So, it goes with ser. So if you want to say, I am sincere , how would you say it?  
S: Soy sincero , sincera .  
T: Good. Soy sincera . Good. And we are sincere :S: Somos sinceras , if it's women.  
T: Good.  
S: Or sinceros .  
T: Good. But, as you correc tly said, you might want to say, I am being sincere now . So to give the 
meaning of I am being sincere , you will say, very literally, I am being sincere . How would you 
say that? I am being sincere :  
S: Estoy , I forgot the word for being .  
T: Ser is to be , in this case because it refers to sincero , so how would you make that -ing? Vender , 
vendiendo . Ser:  
S: Estoy siendo sincero .  
T: Or in your case it would be?  
S: Sincera .  
T: Good. Estoy siendo sincera.  Or estoy siendo sincero .  
Honest  in Spanish is honesto . Honesto . So how would you say, we are being honest ?  
S: Estamos siendo honestos .  
T: Good. Estamos siendo honestos . So to be honest , as an idea, is characteristic. But this doesn't 
restrict us in Spanish of course, if you want to say we are being  honest , we can do that in exactly 
the same way as we do in English. We are : estamos , being : siendo , our characteristic to be : 
honestos . Estamos siendo honestos . Good! Salir  is to go out or to leave . Salir . To go out or to 
leave , and it's irregular in th at the I version is not “salo” but, you remember how it was?  
S: Salgo .  
T: Salgo . Good. Salgo . I leave or I go out . Good. Soon , soon  in Spanish is pronto . So you can say, I 
am leaving soon . Is soon  right now?  
S: No.  
T: No. So how would you say, I am lea ving soon ?S: Salgo pronto .  
T: Good. Salgo pronto . And how would you say, I am leaving tomorrow ?  
S: Salgo mañana .  
T: Good. Salgo mañana . But if you want to say, I am leaving right now , and you mean this moment?  
S: Estoy saliendo .  
T: Estoy saliend o. So we need to resist the temptation of the negative language transfer from English 
which will make us want to put -ing in many places where we don't put it in Spanish, which is why 
we are giving usually in the present tense both translations: I wait, I am waiting; I sell, I am selling . 
To buy was comprar .  
S: Comprar .  
T: I buy them , or I'm buying them . How would that be?  
S: Los compro .  
T: Los compro . Good. I am buying them tomorrow :  
S: Los compro mañana .  
T: Good. I am buying them next week . Next w eek is the week that comes . La semana is the week .  
What is to come ?  
S: Venir .  
T: Good. So how would you say the week that comes ? La semana que :  
S: Viene .  
T: So I'm buying them next week, I'm buying them the week that comes:   
S: Los compro la seman a que viene .  
T: Good. Los compro la semana que viene . So again, here we would use -ing in English, I am buying 
them next week , but we want to resist that temptation in Spanish. Los compro la semana queviene . If you wanted to say right now : so maybe  you get a phone call and somebody asks you, 
have you bought them yet? And you say, I am buying them now , how would you say that?  
S: Estoy compr ándolos ahora .  
T: Good, good. I am buying them now . Los estoy comprando ahora, estoy compr ándolos ahora.