Track 36  
T: So we saw that we can use the present tense to refer to the future. For example, if we have some 
future context we can just use the present tense by itself. So we could say I am having breakfast 
with them tomorrow . Now in Spanish, you don’t say with them . You say with they . With they . So 
how would that be, first?  
S: Con ellos.  
T: Good. And to have breakfast , we said, was to “un -fast”. Desayunar , like in English breakfast , 
“break fast”. So, I’m having breakfast with them tomorrow :  
S: Desayuno con ellos mañana .  
T: Good. Desayuno con ellos mañana . Good. And if we don’t have a future context, like mañana  
or any other context showing us it’s the future, we can also use I am going  to speak about the 
future. So you can say I am going to have breakfast with them . How is that?  
S: Voy a desayunar con  ellos.  
T: Good. Voy a desayunar con ellos . Good. And if we have the future context, it doesn’t mean we 
have to say desayuno con ellos mañana . We could also say voy a desayunar con e llos mañana . 
The fact that we have future context doesn’t mean we can’t use voy anymore. So we’ve seen in 
that way we can use the present to talk about the future, but this doesn’t mean that we don’t have 
a future tense in Spanish. We do. Luckily, we don’t  have to learn any new sounds to master the 
future tense in Spanish. The future tense in Spanish is connected with the past tense that we learned 
of haber . Haber . This past of I have had breakfast  or I have eaten , I have gone . So let’s make a 
recap of the forms of haber . Now it’s very irregular, haber , and we said that a nice trick to 
remember the different forms of haber  is just looking at the two vowel sounds inside the verb 
haber . So what are those two vowel sounds?  
S: /a/ and / e/.  
T: Good. Let’s start  with / e/. What does he mean by itself?  
S: I have .T: Good. I have  spelled h-e. And what other person is connected with I? What’s the plural of I, let’s 
say?  
S: Hemos .  
T: Good. We. So we have he for I have  and hemos  for we have . What is ha by itself? H-a:  
S: He, she, it , or you (formal).  
T: Good. So give me the other two versions now.  
S: Han.  
T: Good. They  or you guys.  
S: And has, which is you (informal).  
T: Good. So that's our set. Let’s practice a little bit some structures with haber  just t o recap. So what 
was to sleep ? Dormant :  
S: Dormir .  
T: Good. So how would you say I have slept ? Begin with I have :  
S: He dormido .  
T: Good. We have slept :  
S: Hemos dormido .  
T: He has slept :  
S: Ha dormido .  
T: Good. How would you say to rec ommend ?  
S: Recomendación . Recomendar .  
T: Good. So how would you say They have recommended it, they have recommended it , and I remind 
you that with these structures with haber , the it has to come before haber . There’s no option of 
where to put it. So They have recommended it :  
S: Lo han recomendado .T: Lo han recomendado . Good. So these forms that we have, these forms of haber that we have – 
he, hemos, ha, has, han – are also the endings that we have for the future tense. So like I said, 
we will learn  the future tense now without having to learn any new sounds. Now, the interesting 
thing about the future tense is that we take the verb in its “to” form, where it’s an –ar verb, -er 
verb, or –ir verb, doesn’t matter, and we put the ending at the end of th e “to” form. And we 
stress the ending. We are effectively pushing the accent into the future. For example, we have 
comer , and what was I have  from haber ?  
S: He.  
T: He. So that’s the sound, without the h, just the sound / e/. That’s the sound that we need for future 
for I. We add that on to comer  and we get comeré , and that’s I will eat . Now we are pushing the 
accent into the future, which might just seem like a coincidence. But you can notice that it happens 
in other languages as well, this phenomenon. For  example, in Greek part of the past tense is to pull 
the accent back one syllable, to pull the accent back into the past. And actually, this is so important 
in Greek that if there is not a syllable there to do it, you add one to pull the accent back into t he 
past. So this is a phenomenon that you see in different languages. The accents representing 
somehow or reflecting somehow the concept of time and tenses. So here we have pushing the 
accent into the future: comeré . I will eat . You can give me the rest of  the versions for the future of 
comer .  
S: Comeremos .  
T: Good. Comeremos : We will eat.   
S: Comerá .  
T: Good. He will eat .  
S: Comerás .  
T: You (informal) will eat .  
S: Comerán .  
T: Good. They  or you guys will eat . Good. What was to go ? We said it was very irregular. We have 
voy and vamos  and va, but the verb to go  doesn’t look anything like them.S: Ir.  
T: Ir. Ir in the future is regular. So we can follow these rules and get the future tenses of to go: I will 
go, he will go.  So what is I will go ?  
S: Iré.  
T: Iré. And we will go :  
S: Iremos .  
T: Iremos . He will go :  
S: Irá.  
T: Irá. They  or you guys :  
S: Irán.  
T: Irán. Like the country. They will go to Iran :  
S: Irán a Irán .  
T: Irán a Irán . Good. You (informal) will go :  
S: Irás.  
T: Good. And what if we wanted to make it a question? Will you go? :  
S: ¿Irás?  
T: Good. Won’t you go? :  
S: ¿No irás ?  
T: Why won’t you go? :  
S: ¿Por qué no irás ?  
T: Good. What was to find  or to encounter ?  
S: Encontrar .  
T: Encontrar . I will find :S: Encontraré .  
T: Good. Encontraré . I will find it :  
S: Lo encontraré .  
T: Good. Lo encontraré . We will find it :  
S: Los encontraré .  
T: That was an interesting error, because I said we, so I made I plural with we, and your mind made 
the it plural, ah?  
S: Yeah.  
T: We wil l find it :  
S: Lo encontraremos .  
T: Good. Lo encontraremos . He or she or you (formal) will find it :  
S: Lo encontrará .  
T: Good. Lo encontrará . He will find them , or she will find them , or you (formal) will find them :  
S: Los encontrarán .  
T: So you m ade both of them them  or they.  
S: You said them .  
T: But we said He will find them  or she will find them.   
S: Oh sorry! Los encontrará.   
T: Good. Los encontrará . So we want to think about the two things separately, ah? Who is doing the 
verb and who are th ey doing it to. Who or what are they doing it to. We said that quedar  means 
to remain, quedar , and to get the meaning of I stay  we say I remain myself . How was that? I 
remain myself :  
S: Me quedo .  
T: Me quedo . Good. How would you say I will stay , then? I will remain myself.S: Quedaré .  
T: Good, but quedaré  means I will remain  and if you want the meaning of stay, you must, must use - 
S: Me.  
T: Yeah.  
S: Me quedaré .  
T: Me quedaré . I will remain myself  or I will stay . I will stay here :  
S: Me quedaré aquí .  
T: Good. What was to prepare ?  
S: Preparar .  
T: Good. And I will prepare :  
S: Prepararé .  
T: Good. So it’s very important to think out the whole verb, preparar , and then add on the -e, 
prepararé . Because a very common mistake that learners make is to say  preparé . And they miss 
out the last ar because they don’t think out the whole verb first. So we must think out the whole 
verb first, preparar , and then add on the ending, prepararé . What was to wait  or to hope ?  
S: Esperar .  
T: Esperar . I will wait :  
S: Esperaré .  
T: Good. What was to organize ?  
S: Organizar .  
T: Good. He will organize :  
S: Organizará .  
T: Good. Organizará . So the useful thing about the accent being on this ending is that we don’t have 
to worry about where the accent goes when we’re pron ouncing the whole verb, organizará .On the end. Organizará . They will organize :  
S: Organizarán .  
T: Good. Organizarán . Good. What was tired ?  
S: Cansado .  
T: Good. Cansado . So how would you say I will be tired ? I will be tired :  
S: Seré ? Ah. Estaré can sada .  
T: Good. Estaré cansada . Good.  How would it will be  be, from ser? It will be , using ser:  
S: Será .  
T: Good. Sound familiar from anywhere?  
S: Que será , será.  
T: Yes. So very simple, the future tense. Doesn’t matter if we have –ar, -er, or –ir verb. We are adding 
on these endings and these endings are the same as the different versions of haber . So if we forget 
them we can look back to haber  and then we just add that on the end. But, in saying that, the future 
tense is not so often used in Sp anish. Most of the time you will find yourself using present or voy 
a, vamos  a. But the future tense does exist and now you know it.