Track 4  
T: How would you say urgent ?  
S: Urgente.   
T: Good, Urgente . Urgente . How would you say urgently ?  
S: Urgentemente.   
T: Urgentemente.  I love you  in Spanish is te quiero , literally I want you . You might have also heard 
te amo . You should be wary of this difference. Te quiero  you can use with friends, you can use 
with lovers very soon. Te amo  is much much more serious but te quiero  is very  common and it 
literally means I want you . So te is you, we can get rid of this and here we are left with I want .  
S: Quiero.   
T: Quiero . Good, how would you say I don’t want ?  
S: No quiero.   
T: No quiero.  Good, we just put no before. One of my favourit e rules for convertible words is the 
rule for words ending -ion. This is an extremely useful rule. Words ending -ion are the same in 
English and Spanish, just in Spanish they have the accent on the end. So for example, in English 
we have opinion , and in Sp anish you are going to pronounce syllable by syllable, making sure that 
you are pronouncing the vowels as they are written and you are going to put the accent on the end.  
S: Opinión.   
T: Opinión . Good, passion ?  
S: Pasión.   
T: Pasión.  Good! And you prono unced an s because we don’t want /sh/. Preparation ? Now if 
it’s -tion, t-i-o-n, if we have -tion, it’s going to be c-i-o-n in Spanish. And this c-i-o-n is pronounced 
/ción/ like an  s in most of the Spanish -speaking world, or in most of Spain it's pronounce d /thion /. 
So you can choose, if you have a particular affiliation for Spain you can make this /th/. If not, I 
suggest using the /s/ sound because the majority of Spanish speakers are using this sound and it’salso much easier. It doesn’t appear diffic ult here: preparación , but if you want to ask for a beer 
for example with the /s/ sound you are going to ask for a /cervesa/ , if you are going to ask using 
the /th/  sound you are going to ask for a /cervetha/ . So, I would suggest unless you have a particu lar 
affiliation with Spain or you particularly want to be practicing with some Spanish friends or 
whatever to use the /s/ sound. So you have a word like organization, that z as well is going to sound 
like an s  or a / th/. /Or-ga-ni-tha-thión /, so yo u see, much easier , then this is  /or-ga-ni-sa-ción/ .  
S: Organización.   
T: Good. Preparation:   
S: Preparación.   
T: Generation:   
S: Genaración.   
T: Generación.   
S: Generación.   
T: Good. We had a little bit slipping in from English, one of the vowels there,  but if you take it syllable 
by syllable we get every vowel perfect. Generación:   
S: Generación.   
T: Confirmation:   
S: Confirmación.   
T: Confirmación.   
S: I was tempted to say confermación .  
T: Ah! But you thought “no, I, like ink.” This is act ually called “language transfer”, so this is negative 
language transfer. Things that come from English affecting your Spanish which are not part of 
Spanish, are negative language transfer. And what is useful from English like these convertible 
words that w e are using, as far as language learning is concerned, this is positive language transfer. 
So part of our journey here is to identify what is negative language transfer and what is positive 
language transfer and using both to our advantage. And English bec omes more interesting whenwe learn Spanish because we start to see where some words come from, where is the inherent 
wisdom in the vocabulary. So confirmation  for example means with signing . Con is with in 
Spanish and firma  is signature . So when you conf irm you are doing it “with signature”. 
Conversation:   
S: Conversación.   
T: Good. And this means “with verses” , “with verse”. Confrontation:   
S: Confrontación.   
T: Confrontación. And front  actually , like in frontación , comes from frente  which  means forehead.  
So it’s “with the forehead” , when you confront you go forward with the forehead. Complication:   
S: Complicación.   
T: Complicación.  Here com- is also con- but it changes to an m because of that p. It happens the 
same in English and Spanish . Complicación . But this is “with folding” from Latin, plicare , to 
fold. You know when you fold stuff up I guess it gets more complicated or something like that. 
The reason why this is my favourite rule is because out of these words ending -ion, if you tak e the 
words that end –ation , if you take those words and you get rid of the –tion and you put an r on the 
end you get the verb. Let me give you an example. Preparation , preparación , preparar .  
And there you get the verb to prepare . So there is like 1,00 0 verbs now we know in Spanish.  
What was generation ?  
S: Generación.   
T: Good. What is to generate ?  
S: Generar.   
T: Generar.  Good, what was confirmation ?  
S: Confirmación … Confirmación.   
T: Good. What is to confirm ?  
S: Confirmar.T: Yes, Confirmar.  So if you had to guess , how do you think you would say to sign ? If to confirm  is 
“with sign ing”:  
S: Oh, firmar.   
T: Yes! Firmar.  Firmar  means to sign . Complication:   
S: Complicación.   
T: To complicate:   
S: Complicar.   
T: Good. So now we can make some sentenc es with these. What was again I want ? And if we forget 
that we can think of I love you  in Spanish and then take away the you.  
S: Quiero.   
T: Quiero.  So now we can make some sentences. I want to prepare:   
S: Quiero preparar.   
T: Good, quiero preparar . How do you say cooperation?   
S: Cooperación.   
T: Good, cooperación . Good, you pronounced both o's, that was correct. Cooperación . It just sounds 
a tiny bit longer, cooperación . To cooperate:   
S: Cooperar.   
T: Cooperar.  I want to cooperate:   
S: Quiero cooperar.   
T: Good! How do you say cancellation ?  
S: Cancelación.   
T: And to cancel:   
S: Cancelar.T: I want to cancel:   
S: Quiero cancelar.   
T: Good. How do you think you would say I don’t want to cancel ?  
S: No quiero cancelar.   
T: Perfect, exploration:   
S: Expl oración .  
T: To explore:   
S: Explorar.   
T: Good. I want to explore:   
S: Quiero explorar.   
T: Perfect. The word for me in Spanish is the same as English. You are just going to pronounce it how 
it’s written.  
S: Me.  
T: Me, good. How would you say I want to prepare myself ? Myself  is the same as me. So you would 
say I want to prepare me .  
S: Quiero prepararme.   
T: Good, quiero prepararme . I want to prepare me. I want to prepare myself  and this means I want 
to get ready  and you can use this like I want to get r eady . Quiero prepararme . Now this probably 
sounds quite formal in English: I want to prepare myself , but we should be aware that in English, 
Latin words sound especially formal. Not always: cancel  doesn’t sound formal because it’s the 
only word we use to s ay cancel. But most of the time we have two words with similar meanings, 
like for example you might have to find  and then to encounter , which sounds a little bit more 
formal or a little bit more literary or flowery. And these ones that have these different  feelings in 
English are generally Latin words. And the Germanic words like find, which in German is Finden  
(same word), sound more everyday, colloquial. Now we should bear in mind that that’s in English,and Latin words in Spanish, which is m ore Latin, of course don’t sound formal, they just sound 
normal.