Track 40  
T: An interesting thing about prepositions is that they have a habit of changing between languages. 
To give you an example, in English we say I fall in love with.  In Spanish, you say I enamor myself 
of. I fall in love of you . Now again, this is something that we look at with interest rather than 
looking at it as an obstacle , for the insight that it might give us about how we perceive and express 
the world through our own language. Now the fact that we use with is not necessarily casual. 
Casual in the sense of meaningless. The fact that we use with is not necessarily without it s weight, 
without it s meaning. If I say I fall in love with you , that pr eposition with necessarily involves you 
in my process of falling in love. Now this of is much more detached in feeling than with. So there 
is a school of thought which explores how these elements of language might have a real tangible 
effect on the way we interact with the world and with certain concepts and the way we express 
them and how that feeds back into the way we perceive and view the world. And I think this is a 
very nice example between falling in love with and falling in love of. So this is somet hing to think 
about and just take interest in whenever you find that in Spanish the verb uses a different 
preposition than the one it does in English . Rather than just seeing it as a hurdle to correctness that 
you need to memorize, maybe have a litt le look at how it might actually be affecting, somehow or 
other, the way you perceive the world. This also helps the memory on a practical level. You are 
much more capable of internalizing and remembering this difference if rather than just mindlessly 
memo rizing that you’re using de instead of con here. We are looking with a more analytical eye, 
with a curious eye, to understand what effect this might possibly have on us and in this way we 
are just going to learn the differences much easier.  
Let’s start w ith this verb : To fall in love  is to enamor oneself . So if you look up in the dictionary 
to fall in love , what you will find is enamorarse , written as one word. Now it’s important to realize 
that it is not one word. You still have a verb there ending -ar, enamorar  and then the se is just 
hooked on. So let’s start with I fall in love . How will you make enamorarse , I fall in love, I enamor 
myself ?  
S: Me enamoro .T: Exactly. Me enamoro . Now if you want to say I fall in love with you , we’re probably going  to 
speak informally. In Spanish we’re not going to say with you , we’re going to say of you . I enamor 
myself of you :  
S: Me enamoro de ti .  
T: Yeah, me enamoro de ti . Very good. I fall in love with him :  
S: Me enamoro de él .  
T: Good. Me enamoro de él . If we want to give the meaning of I’m falling in love  right now . We can 
say I am. How is I am, from estar ?  
S: Estoy .  
T: Good. Falling in love . Enamoring myself :  
S: Enamorándome .  
T: Good. It can come actually after the -ando  or before estoy . Estoy enamor ándome . Me estoy 
enamorando de él . Another verb that chooses a different preposition in Spanish and English is 
the verb to think . To think , we said it was related to the word pensive  which means thoughtful.  
S: Pensar .  
T: Good. Pensar . Now you don’t say I think about you in Spanish. You say I’m thinking or I think in 
or on you . What was the word for in and on? I think we looked at it very briefly.  
S: En.  
T: En. Good. So we say I think in you or on you . It’s probably in, actually , because Arabic says it in 
this way and of course when languages come into contact , like the 800 years of contact that Spanish 
and Arabic had, they share a lot more than vocabulary. They also share structures. So we are 
probably saying I’m thinking in you  to say I think about you , so how do you say that? I’m thinking 
about you or I think about you . Let’s keep it informal.  
S: Penso . Sorry, pienso en ti .  
T: Pienso en ti . Good. How would you say we think about you , or we’re thinking about you ?S: Pens amos en ti .  
T: Pensamos en ti . We think about her , or we think in her , or literally we think in she :  
S: Pensamos en ella .  
T: Good. Pensamos en ella . To dream  in Spanish is soñar .  
S: Soñar .  
T: This / ny/ sound like the one we have in mañana  is with the ñ. Ñ is the only letter that we get in 
Spanish that we don’t get in English and it’s like an n with a little squiggly line on the top of the n 
and it’s basically n-y. So n with squiggly line on top is n-y, like in mañana . Like in soñar . Soñar . 
To dream .  
S: Soñar .  
T: How do think you say I dream ?  
S: Soño .  
T: Would be “ soño ”, but what might happen? How is to sleep ?  
S: Dormir .  
T: Dormir . And I sleep :  
S: Duermo .  
S: Sueño .  
T: Yeah, so this is happening here, but there is really no way to know if i t’s going to happen or not. 
Sometimes it does , sometimes it doesn’t. If it happens for one of the versions, of course it’s going 
to happen for all of the versions that we stress the o. So, sueño , sueña , sueñan , sueñas .  
But, we dream :  
S: Soñamos .  
T: Soñamos , because we are not stressing it anymore. Soñamos , we are stressing the /a/. Very good. 
We don’t say I dream of  in Spanish. We say I dream with . So here we use with in Spanish. I dreamwith her . The language, we said, is permitting and requiring u s to perceive and express the world 
in a certain way. So when we say, you know, I dream with her , maybe you can imagine that when 
people began to talk about what they were dreaming that they had the idea of the involvement of 
the other person. You know, I’m dreaming with you.  You don’t know, but it’s interesting to think 
about how that change in the preposition can really affect the way we perceive the world. And then 
subconsciously, because even though our beliefs might have modernized , like if I dream abo ut you  
I don’t really think you’re there, and I don’t really think you are participating, but the language 
might hold an old belief that it is with you. That you are actually participating in my dream. So it’s 
interesting to think about, and thinking abou t it is going to help your memory internalize just this 
simple fact that the preposition changes. So how would you say I dream about her , or in Spanish, 
I dream or I’m dreaming with her ?  
S: Sueño con ella .  
T: Sueño con ella . Good. He dreams about him :  
S: Sueña con él .  
T: Sueña con él . Good. What was for me ?  
S: Para mí.  
T: Good. And for you informal?  
S: Para ti .  
T: Good. And what was from ?  
S: De.  
T: De. From me :  
S: De mí.  
T: From you  (informal):  
S: De ti .  
T: De ti.  Good. With with, we get a little exception. With me  is conmigo  and it’s spelled like one 
word. So this -go is coming from nowhere and it’s all becoming one word, where de mi , para miare two separate words. So we have conmigo  for with me  and contigo , with you , informal. 
Conmigo . C-o-n-m-i-g-o or contigo , c-o-n-t-i-g-o. So this is with me, with you . What was to come ?  
S: Venir .  
T: Venir . To come . Good. So how would you say, speaking informally, do you want to come with 
me?:  
S: ¿Quieres venir conmigo ?  
T: Good. Don’t yo u want to come with me? :  
S: ¿No quieres venir conmigo ?  
T: ¿No quieres venir conmigo ? Why don’t you want to come with me? :  
S: ¿Por qué no quieres venir conmigo ?  
T: Good. ¿ Por qué no quieres venir conmigo ? What was I have  in the sense of possessi on?  
S: Tengo .  
T: Tengo . Good. And if we want to say I have to , we can add something to that tengo . It’s not a 
comfortable translation either, if that helps you remember it.  
S: Tengo que .  
T: Tengo que . Good. So how would you say you have to come with me , again speaking informally ?  
You have to come with me :  
S: Tienes que venir conmigo .  
T: Tienes que venir conmigo . Good. Good. What was I can , from to be able ?  
S: Puedo .  
T: Puedo . Can you come with me ? (still informal):  
S: ¿Puedes venir conmigo ?T: Good. ¿ Puedes venir conmigo ? So we have conmigo  for with me , contigo  for with you , speaking 
informally. So, we could say I dream about you  and we’re going to say I dream with you , speaking 
informally.  
S: Sueño contigo .  
T: Sueño contigo . I’m going with yo u, informally still:  
S: I’m going.  I’m forgetting the verbs.  
T: You’ll forget them many times and you need to find the way that you, you dig them up. That’s the 
most important thing : to take this skill away. So going , what does going  relate to, if anythi ng?  
S: Ah, voyage . Voy.  
T: You see, I’m going with you , speaking informally:  
S: Voy contigo .  
T: Very good. To depend , in Spanish, is depender . Depender . How would you say it depends ?  
S: Dependa .  
T: Make sure before you start to change any verb, you  do a quick check to see what type of verb it is.  
S: Depende .  
T: Yes, depender , -er verb. Depende . Good. Now in Spanish we don’t say it depends on . We say it 
depends of . So how would you say it depends on her or it depends of her ?  
S: Depende de ella .  
T: Depende de ella . The word for yes and the word for if are the same in Spanish. So you know how 
to say yes in Spanish?  
S: Sí.  
T: Sí. Good. So this is also if. It depends on if she wants to go . Let’s say that. It depends :  
S: Depende .  
T: On or it dep ends of  in Spanish:S: De.  
T: Good. If she wants to go :  
S: Si quiere ir .  
T: Good, so all together. It depends on if she wants to go :  
S: Depende de si quiere ir .  
T: Good. Depende de si quiere ir . It depends on if she wants to go.