Track 41  
T: Let’s  look again at how we speak about the future in Spanish. We saw that we have a future tense 
but we might not use it very often because, firstly, we can just use the present to talk about the 
future if we have some future context : some word like mañana , tomorrow;  later , más tarde , or 
even another part of the sentence which shows us that we are talking about the future, we can just 
use the present. When we don’t have that we can use ir a, to go to , so voy a , vamos a , vas a , which 
is also present tense, voy, vas, vamos , it’s present, but we can use it to talk about the future. So, 
for example, bailar , bailar , b-a-i-l-a-r, means to dance . We can relate it to ballerina , ballerina 
actually is just dancer  in Spanish, bailarín  in Spanish is dancer , so that’s where  we get ballerina  
from: bailar . So, if you want to say we are going to dance :  
S: Vamos a bailar .  
T: Vamos a bailar . Good. If you had some future context, like later , más tarde , or literally, more 
late, you could just say we dance later :  
S: Bailamos más tarde .  
T: Good. Bailamos más tarde . But you could have used that structure with vamos  if you wanted to, 
you have the option. We can say bailamos más tarde or we could say we are going to dance later :  
S: Vamos a bailar más tarde .  
T: Very good. Vamos a bailar más tarde . So, we saw that we have a future tense, we have a future 
tense although we might not need to use it very often because we have this situation in Spanish 
that we can use the present, or that ir a, to go to , is used even more often than in English, this 
structure of I’m going to do it  instead of I’ll do it  is used even more in Spanish than in English. 
But, we do have a future tense, and the future tense is luckily very related to the different versions 
that we found of the verb haber . Haber  was a very irregular verb, this to have  that we use to go 
into the past. What was the trick that we used to find the different versions of this very irregular 
verb haber ?  
S: We used the vowels. The / e/ and / a/ sounds.T: Good. We used these to take off from, we go: “what are the two vowels in haber? / e/ and / a/,” 
okay . He by itself means:  
S: I have .  
T: I have . And ha by itself means:  
S: He/she/it or you (formal) have .  
T: Perfect. And from these we can find the other versions, so we have he for I have , and we have  is:  
S: Hemos .  
T: Hemos . And we have ha for he/she/it/you  (formal ). For you (informal), what would we do to ha?  
S: Has.  
T: Has. H-a-s, completely silent, this h, this h that we find in all of these forms. They have or you 
guys have :  
S: Han.  
T: Han. So, these are our different versions of haber . Now, these very sounds, so, the sounds, because 
we are not including the h, the sound s /e/, /emos /, /a/, /as/, /an/ are the same sounds that we add 
on to the “to” form of the verb to  get this future tense. So, we have a verb like bailar , to dance . If 
I want to say I will dance , using this future tense, I can look at how is I have  from haber , so, how 
is I have from haber ?  
S: He.  
T: He. And I can just stick it on the end. But it’ s the sound that is the same, what we are sticking on 
the end of the verb is an e, not the h-e. So, I will dance :  
S: Is it “bailáre” or bailaré ?  
T: The ending takes the accent and we said that in Spanish we are pushing the accent  into the future, 
which is an interesting phenomenon, we spoke about, how in Greek, for example, in the past you 
pull it back into the past, so we find this phenomenon occurring in other languages as well. Here 
we are literally pushing the accent into the future and we accent  that ending and we say bailaré , 
bailaré , I will dance . We will dance :S: Bailaremos .  
T: Bailaremos . He/she/it/you  (formal) will dance :  
S: Bailará .  
T: Bailará . They or you guys will dance :  
S: Bailarán .  
T: Bailarán . And you (informal):  
S: Bailará s.  
T: Bailarás . Good. So, we get the future tense without having to learn anything new, we just have to 
remember that we can look back at haber  and see what the different versions of haber  were, and 
then use them to build our future. So, in fact we have t wo future tenses, let’s say, we have will and 
would,  they are both future tenses. Now, -e, -emos, -a, -as, -an, they work for all verbs -er, -ir, -ar, 
it doesn’t matter ; they are all using these sounds to form will. And we have the same situation with 
would. -er, -ir, -ar verbs, they are all together. And our key sound for would  is -ía. So, we add on 
-ía to the end of the verb, we are accenting it again, because it’s pushing the accent into the future, 
and this –ía actually gives us I/he/she/it  and you formal. So, here I is jumping in with he/she/it  and 
you formal. So, bailaría , bailaría , means I would dance , he would dance, she would dance, you 
(formal) would dance , or it would dance if you can think of some context where that would make 
sense. I thin k you can work out what the rest would be. So, let’s try.  
How would you say we would dance ?  
S: Bailariámos .  
T: Good, the only thing is that the accent stays on the ía.  
S: Bailaríamos .  
T: Bailaríamos . Good. They or you guys :  
S: Bailarían .  
T: Bailarían . And you informal:S: Bailarías .  
T: Good. So, that’s it, that’s would . So the y, would  and will, share some characteristics, as they are 
both different futures . They share the characteristic that we are adding on to the full verb: bailar , 
bailaré: I will dance , bailar , bailaría : I would dance ; and they share the characteristic that they 
are stressing the ending, that the accent is going to the ending, and they share the characteristic 
that for both futures we group all the verbs together: -ar, -er, -ir verbs, so for both futures we have 
one set of endings for all verb types. What was to go ?  
S: Ir.  
T: Ir. Good. I would go :  
S: Iría.  
T: Yes, iría. So, this actually works for I, he, she, it , and you formal. So, in the would  tense we have 
I jumping in with he, she, it, you  formal. How would you say she wouldn’t go ?  
S: No iría .  
T: Good. No iría . Good. What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . How would you say I would eat ?  
S: Comería .  
T: Good. I would eat, but I don’t have time :  
S: Comería , pero no tengo... hora ?  
T: Tempo , tempo  we have in English.  
S: Tiempo .  
T: Comería , pero no tengo tiempo . Good. How would you say transformation ?  
S: Transformación .  
T: Transformación . Good. So, to transform :S: Transformar .  
T: Good. Transformar . How would you say it would transform ?  
S: Transformaría .  
T: Transformaría . This, you would use it if you were to say it would transform something else , so 
you could say it would transform the situation , how would you say that, it would transform the 
situation ?  
S: Transformaría la situación .  
T: Transformaría la situación . If you wanted to say it would transform , and you mean it would get 
transformed , it would undergo a transformation , then in Spanish you will say it would transform 
itself . Now, in English we just use the context to understand whether we mean to transform 
something else or it would transform, it would get transformed , but in Spanish most of the time 
you are going to want to put that itself . What is that itself ?  
S: Se.  
T: Good. Itself, se. It would get transformed :  
S: Se transformaría .  
T: Good. Se transformaría . What is contamination ?  
S: Contaminación .  
T: Contaminación . To contaminate :  
S: Contaminar .  
T: Contaminar . If you want to say it contaminates , how would you say it, it contaminates , present 
tense?  
S: Contamina .  
T: Contamina . So, contamina  would mean it contaminates, it’s contaminating , maybe we are talking 
about the factory and we say contamina . If we want to say, it gets contaminated , we don’t really 
have this gets in Spanish, so in Spanish to give this meaning of it gets contaminated  we will justsay it contaminates itself . Now, it doesn’t mean that it’s responsible for its own contamination or 
that it is literally contaminating itself, it’s just the structure that we u se to replace this gets that we 
don’t have in Spanish. So, if we want to say it gets contaminated , and we are talking about the 
river, we will just say it contaminates itself , even though we all understand that what we don’t 
mean is that the river is a ctually contaminating itself . So how would you say that,  it contaminates 
itself , or it gets contaminated ?  
S: Se contamina .  
T: Good. Se contamina . Good. How would you say it would get contaminated ? So, it’s not that  it 
would contaminate, it’s it would get contaminated :  
S: Se contaminaría .  
T: Good. Se contaminaría . What is imagination ?  
S: Imaginación .  
T: Imaginación . And to imagine :  
S: Imaginar .  
T: Imaginar . Well done for converting the / j/ to / kh/. Imagination  – imaginación  - imaginar . I 
imagine :  
S: Imagino .  
T: Imagino . You will often hear in Spanish  I imagine myself . How would that be?  
S: Me imagino .  
T: Me imagino . And here it doesn’t really change the meaning. Sometimes adding this myself , or 
herself , itself , yourself , etc., doesn’t r eally change the meaning very much. Imagino , me imagino , 
I imagine . How would you say I would imagine ?  
S: Me imaginaría .  
T: Me imaginaría . Good. I would imagine that he doesn’t want to go : what is this that that we use?  
It’s the same as what .S: Que.  
T: Good. So, I would imagine :  
S: Me imaginaría .  
T: Me imaginaría . That:  
S: Que.  
T: He doesn’t want to go :  
S: No quiere ir .  
T: So, all together  I would imagine that he doesn’t want to go :  
S: Me imaginaría que no quiere ir .  
T: Good. Me imaginaría que no quiere ir .