Track 42  
T: So we saw for would , the future tense of would , we have our key sound -ía, we have the key sound 
-ía which we are adding on to the end of the verb, and this gives you the version for I, he, she, it, 
and you formal. So, for th is one we have I jumping in with he, she, it, you formal. So, we can take 
a verb like hablar  and we can say I would speak . Hablar  is to speak,  and I would speak :  
S: Hablaría .  
T: Good. Hablaría . Good. We would speak :  
S: Hablariámos , hablaríamos .  
T: Hablaríamos . They would speak :  
S: Hablarían .  
T: Good. They wouldn’t speak :  
S: No hablarían .  
T: No hablarían.  Good. The verb to like  in Spanish is gustar .  
S: Gustar .  
T: Gustar . So, to like  is gustar , but it works differently in Spanish, and the way it works in Spanish 
renders the translation to like  as kind of complicated. It would be much better to translate gustar  
as to be pleasing . So, when you say I like it , what we want to say in Spanish is it is pleasing to me.  
That’s the way we say I like it in Spanish, it is pleasing to me . So, if you take gustar  to mean to 
be pleasing  or to please , how would you make it is pleasing  or it pleases ?  
S: Gusta .  
T: Gusta . Good, so that’s it is pleasing  or it pleases . Now, if you want to say it is pleasing t o me :  
S: Me gusta .  
T: Me gusta . And this is how you say I like it in Spanish, me gusta . So, a very common error that 
Spanish  learners make is to say me gusto , to translate it like from English literally, I like , and theysay gusto , but what does that me an then actually, if you say me gusto , what does it mean if gustar  
means to be pleasing ?  
S: It means I please myself .  
T: Yes, it means I please myself, I like myself . So you want to be careful there, you don’t want to be 
walking around telling everybody how much you like yourself,  me gusto mucho . No. Me gusta 
mucho , it pleases me . So, if you are saying I like them , then of course what you are saying is they 
please me , so we must take this inter step, this Spanglish step, to think about it lite rally, to think it 
through literally, so we are sure that we are getting the meaning that we want. So, how would you 
say I like them  or they please me  or they are pleasing to me ?  
S: Me gustan .  
T: Good. Me gustan . Good. So how do you think you would say  I would like, it would please me ?  
S: Me gustaría .  
T: Good. Me gustaría . So, just like in English, you use this a lot in Spanish. Me gustaría , to eat now , 
I would like to eat now :  
S: Me gustaría comer ahora .  
T: Good. Me gustaría comer ahora . We would  like to eat now, it would please us to eat now:   
S: Nos gustaríamo , it’s nos gustarían .  
T: It, it would please us, to eat now . So, you have this…  
S: Is nos gustarían  correct?  
T: No, because you have this idea of nos, you have this plural idea and it’s manifesting itself in the 
verb, so you are not totally in control of your building process at the moment, you are letting some 
guess work come in, and you need to cut it, you need to start with the verb. It would please us . So, 
it would please :  
S: Gustaría .  
T: Exactly. So when you start with the verb you are in control.S: Right.  
T: Now you can say it would please us :  
S: Nos gustaría .  
T: To eat now :  
S: Comer ahora .  
T: Exactly, very good. Nos gustaría comer ahora . What was to see  or to view ?  
S: Ver.  
T: Good. Ver. Good.  I would like to see you , let’s speak informally, I would like to see you :  
S: Me gustaría verte .  
T: Good. Me gustaría verte . A couple of verbs, they contract a little bit when we add on our future 
endings. So when I say  our future endings, I refer to both futures: will and would . For example, we 
have poder  – to be able , and would be able is could : I would be able to go , I could go . So we have 
poder  – to be able or can, and then we add -ía for would , and it would be podería , but this is a 
very common verb, and common verbs are much more subject to change and irregularities, so 
many years of podería -podería -podería -podería -podería  – the /e/ got lost, the / e/ fell away, the 
/e/ of poder . So, I could, he could, she could , it could, you  (formal) could  is podría .  
S: Podría .  
T: Podría . You can give me the other versions of course. How would you say they could  or you guys 
could ?  
S: Podrían .  
T: Good. And you (informal):  
S: Podrías .  
T: Good. And we:  
S: Podríamos .T: Good. What was to come ?  
S: Venir .  
T: Venir . Could you come to my house?  How was my house ?  
S: Mi casa .  
T: Mi casa . Good. So, how would you say Could you come?  And this is to come , we don’t say to here 
in English, but it’s a second verb, will be in th e “to” form, Could you come to my house?   
Let’s speak informally.  
S: ¿Podrías venir a mi casa ?  
T: Good. ¿ Podrías venir a mi casa ? To say or to tell  is decir . So we have hablar , which is to speak 
or to talk , but to say  or to tell  is decir . Could you tell me something?  Could you tell me something?  
And we are speaking informally still.  
S: ¿Me podrías decir algo ?  
T: Good. ¿Me podrías decir algo?  or ¿Podrías decirme algo?  Could you tell me if you want to 
come?  So, let’s start with could you tell me if , and  I remind you that if is the same as yes.  
S: ¿Podrías decirme si quieres venir ?  
T: Okay.