Track 43  
T: Another verb that contracts in this way, losing its last e, like poder  becoming podría  is haber , to 
have . So I would have , how would it be? You're go nna add the -ía on haber , and it's gonna lose 
it's e like poder  did. So how would it sound?  
S: Habría .  
T: Habría . So, habría  means I would have , you would have  (formally), he would have, she would 
have, it would have . Which means, now you can make senten ces like I would have gone . I would 
have eaten something, but... , etc. So let's practice this. How would you say I would have gone ? 
What's to go , first?  
S: Ir.  
T: Ir. How would you make gone  from to go ? What is the rule to get gone  from to go ? The version 
that we need after haber . After any version of haber , doesn't matter if it's he, hemos,  or habría , 
it's the version of the verb that comes after haber . How do we get that version?  
S: Ido.  
T: Yes. Ok, I take away -ir, the ending. It's the whole  verb. But whatever, it doesn't matter. I'm taking 
away the ending, -ir, and I'm putting -ido. Good. I would have gone :  
S: Habría ido .  
T: Good. Habría ido . We would have eaten , how would that be? We would have eaten :  
S: Habríamos comido .  
T: Good. Habríamos comido . We could even make a sentence now, like We would have been able 
to go . We would have been able to go . And as long as you tackle each individual part individually, 
you will stay in control. And you will be able to make these apparently reall y complicated 
sentences, which are actually quite simple because they take the same structure in English and 
Spanish. So, we would have , how would that be? We would have :  
S: Habríamos .T: Good. Been able . So what's to be able , related to power ?  
S: Poder .  
T: Ahh. Poder  is to be able . How would you make that been able,  or just the version after haber ?  
What does it do when it comes after haber ?  
S: Podido .  
T: To go :  
S: Ir.  
T: Good. Habríamos podido ir . We would have been able to go . Good. You could s ay they would 
have been able to eat . So, divide it up block by block, and it is very simple.  
S: They would have .  
T: Good.  
S: Habrían podido comer .  
T: Habrían podido comer . So if you were to say something like they would have come to eat , then 
come  is a verb of motion. So how would you say they would have come to eat ?  
S: Habrían venido a comer .  
T: Habrían venido a comer , because we have venir , a verb of motion, connecting to another to form. 
Good. With this very useful structure of habría , habrían , habríamos , would have , you could also 
say something like I would have liked it . You just need to think in this Spanglish, in this in between 
language, the literal translation of how we want to say it in English, and then convert it. So, I would 
have liked it  is it would have pleased me . It would have pleased me . So to not lose our control  and 
to stay in control of this process, where is the first place we want our thoughts to go?  
S: It would have .  
T: Yeah. It would have.  Good. So what is it would have ?  
S: Habría .T: Good. Pleased . So it's gustar  after haber . So maybe it's better to think of it in this way, “I'm 
finding the version of the verb after haber ,” instead of actually trying to find the translation of the 
word, because the versions after have  are so different in English. We have eaten, gone, walked , so 
if we are looking for walked, gone , or eaten , and we forget that it's just the version after haber , we 
might be looking for a very long time, ah? So, the version after haber , we have -ado or -ido, no?  
S: Gustado .  
T: Good. So now we can make the sentence, It would have pleased me , I would have liked it .  
S: Me habría gustado .  
T: Good. Me habría gustado.  Good. So, I would have liked it . How would you say we would have 
liked it – so - it would have p leased us ?  
S: So it's nos habría gustado .  
T: Very good. Nos habría gustado . And maybe, you might want to say we would have liked them . 
First give me the Spanglish, the literal translation in English. So we want to say we would have 
liked them . What is the literal translation of how we put it into Spanish?  
S: They would have pleased us.   
T: Perfect. Well done. They would have pleased us.  So now you have all you need to make that 
sentence.  
S: Habrían . Nos habrían gustado .  
T: Good. Nos habrían gustado , they would have pleased us, we would have liked them . So we just 
saw some complicated structures with this would , which is especially useful because we can make 
could , and we can make would have . We can also make should  with this would . What was to owe , 
or must , which was related to debt in English?  
S: Deber .  
T: Deber . Good. -er verb. Deber . Now if you say would owe , this means should . How would you say 
then, I should, he should, it should, she should, you ( formal) should ?  
S: Debería .T: Yes. Debería . Good. How would you say you should come to my house ? You should come to my 
house  (informal) :  
S: Deberías venir a mi casa .  
T: Good. Deberías venir a mi casa . Good. You should come to my house to eat . You should come to 
my house to eat:  (Informally, st ill.)  
S: Deberías venir a mi casa a comer .  
T: Good. Deberías venir a comer a mi casa , or deberías venir a mi casa a comer , both are perfectly 
fine. Well done. How would you say we should ?  
S: Deberíamos .  
T: Good. How would you say we should speak ?  
S: Deberíamos hablado .  
T: Here, speak  is to speak . The confusion might come that in English, after can, after should , after 
must , we don't say to. I must eat , not I must to eat . I can eat , not I can to eat . In Spanish, you're 
just using the to form afterw ards. So, we should speak, we should speak:   
S: Deberíamos hablar .  
T: Good. We should speak . Deberíamos hablar . We should speak about it:  (And we said we don't 
need about .)  
S: Deberíamos hablarlo .  
T: Good. Deberíamos hablarlo . We should speak about it , we should speak it . What if you wanted 
to say we should speak to him ?  
S: Deberíamos hablarle .  
T: Good. Deberíamos hablarle . This could actually be to him  or to her  or to you  (formal), no? 
Deberíamos hablarle . What if you wanted to say we should speak t o them  or we should speak to 
you guys ?  
S: Deberíamos hablarles .T: Good. Deberíamos hablarles . How would you say we should speak with him ?  
S: Deberíamos hablar con él .  
T: Good. And with her :  
S: Con ella .  
T: All together?  
S: Deberíamos hablar con  ella.  
T: Good. So choosing these structures, you get around the ambiguity of deberíamos hablarle , which 
could mean him or her or you (formal). Now if we use con, we see very clearly who we mean. 
Deberíamos hablar con él. Deberíamos hablar con ella . Good.  To give  is dar. Dar. To give . 
How would you say I would give ?  
S: Daría .  
T: Daría . They would give:   
S: Darían   
T: Good. They would give me,  or to me :  
S: Me darían.   
T: Good. They would give me it :  
S: Me lo darían.   
T: Good.