Track 45  
T: So how was to like , or we said that the translation that we would give it in Spanish was to ple ase 
or to be pleasing to ?  
S: Me gusta .  
T: So, the "to" version?  
S: Gustar .  
T: Gustar . Good. So how would you say we like it,  and we want to take the route of the literal 
translation, so it is pleasing to us ?  
S: Nos gustamos .  
T: So remember the fi rst place you want your thoughts to go. This is very important, ah.  
S: Well, so gustar  becomes gustamos .  
T: It is pleasing, to us . So, it is pleasing:   
S: Gusta .  
T: Yes.  
S: Nos gusta .  
T: Nos gusta . We were saying that gustar , we can translate as to pl ease or to be pleasing . Now it 
would probably make more sense for us to store it as to be pleasing . Because, if we want to say 
something like she likes it , what we will say is it is pleasing to her . So we have the to her  with 
gustar , so that's why it makes  more sense to translate it as it is pleasing to her  rather than it pleases 
her. This way we store this idea of to. So what is to her ?  
S: Le.  
T: Le. Good. So we have la for her, and to her , le. So if you want to say it is pleasing to her , or she 
likes it , how would it be?  
S: Le gusta .T: Le gusta . And it is pleasing to them , or they like it :  
S: Les gusta .  
T: Good. Les gusta . You had a little battle there, right, with whether it was gustan  or not. Good. And 
you take control of that going it is pleasing , gusta . It is pleasing to them , les gusta . So with gustar , 
we're not using lo and la and los and las. We're using le and les. They like it, it is pleasing to them . 
Les gusta . How would you say they like them , or they are pleasing to them ?  
S: Les gustan .  
T: Good. Les gustan . He likes them , or they are pleasing to him:   
S: Le gustan .  
T: Very good. So there are a couple of other verbs as well that we would prefer to give this kind of 
translation to. What do you think interesar  means? Interesar :  
S: Inter esting .  
T: Interesante  is interesting . What does interesar  look like? It might not be, but what does it look 
like? Interesar . What type of word does it look like?  
S: It's a verb.  
T: Ah.  
S: So it's to interest .  
T: Good. To interest . Good. So this helps  us with comprehension as well, understanding what are our 
types of words and what they tend to look like. So we could translate it as to interest , or we could 
translate it as to be interesting to . And here in this case, it's another verb like gustar , in t hat it 
makes more sense to translate it for ourselves as to be interesting to , because it goes with le and 
not lo. So in our minds this fits then in the Spanish structure if we save that translation as to be 
interesting to  rather than to interest . So how w ould you say it interests me, it is interesting to me ?  
S: Me interesa .  
T: Good. Me interesa . Does it interest you?  Let's speak informally. Does it interest you? :S: ¿Te interesa ?  
T: ¿Te interesa ? Doesn't it interest you?:   
S: ¿No te interesa ?  
T: ¿No te interesa ? Why doesn't it interest you? :  
S: ¿Por qué no te interesa ?  
T: Good. ¿ Por qué no te interesa ? So if we want to say it interests him , what we're really saying is 
it is interesting to him . So we want to him  here. So how would you say that? It interests him  or it's 
interesting to him :  
S: Le interesa .  
T: Good. Le interesa . They're interested in it. It's interesting to them :  
S: Les interesa .  
T: Good. Les interesa . You remember how was to dance , related to ballerina ?  
S: Bailar .  
T: Bailar . Good . So you can ask does it interest her to dance tonight? Does it interest her to dance 
tonight? :  
S: ¿Le interesa bailar esta noche ?  
T: Good. ¿ Le interesa bailar esta noche ? Good. Salir , salir is to leave  or to go out . To leave  or to 
go out . So you can say  does it interest her, is it interesting to her to go out to dance tonight? Does 
it interest her to go out to dance tonight? So let's go from the beginning, does it interest her? :  
S: ¿Le interesa ?  
T: Good. ¿ Le interesa ? And of course le interesa  could me an does it interest her , does it interest 
him, does it interest you  (formal). We don't know by the le. Le interesa , to go out to dance tonight:   
S: Salir a bailar esta noche .T: Good. So here we have a because salir  is a verb of coming and going. ¿ Le inte resa salir a bailar 
esta noche ? Now what if you wanted to ask would it interest you , would it be interesting to you , 
informally? So what was our sound for would , that we add on to the “to” form of the verb?  
What's our key sound for would ?  
S: -ía  
T: -ía, good. Would it interest you? :  
S: Interaría .  
T: Slower.  
S: Interesar , interesaría . ¿Te interesaría ?  
T: Good. Another verb like this is parecer . Parecer , which is to seem . But, in English we already put 
to. It seems to me. It seems to him.  So how do you say it seems to m e? Parecer  is to seem . It seems 
to me :  
S: Me paresa .  
T: Before you change a verb, there's something very quick and very essential that you must do.  
S: It's an -er, not an -ar.  
T: Yes. You must go back to your takeoff point, which is the "to" form, and make a quick check.  
Parecer , -er verb. Ok, I know where I am, I know what I'm doing.  
S: Me parece .  
T: Me parece . It seems to me. It seems to me that . What is this that that we put here? Same as what :  
S: Que.  
T: Que. Spanish  kind of highlights for you that what  is the question version of that. It kinds of shows 
you that much more clearly than English does. But English shows you as well. If you think, in 
English if you take the word that and you get rid of the t and you replac e it with a w, you get what . 
In the same way that if you take the word there  and you get rid of the t and you replace it with w,you get where . Or if you take the word then and get rid of the t and replace it with w, you get when . 
So you have que for that, and then qué for what . Same word. So, it seems to me that :  
S: Me parece que .  
T: He doesn't want to go out tonight.  He doesn't want to go out tonight :  
S: No quiere salir esta noche .  
T: Good. Me parece que no quiere salir esta noche . Good. How would you  say it seems to me that 
he doesn't like it ? It seems to me that he doesn't like it.  Now in English, this that is optional. No?  
It seems to me he doesn't like it.  It seems to me that he doesn't like it.  It's optional. But in Spanish, 
it's obligatory. You want to put this that. And actually, it's really gonna help you think out your 
sentences to put that always. So, it seems to me that he doesn't like it :  
S: Me parece que no lo gusta. Le. No le gusta .  
T: Good. You might want to say me parece bien . That wo uld mean it seems good to me , it seems fine 
to me . But we're not using the word good , we're using the word well. Bien . Me parece bien . It 
seems to me well . You'll find a little gray area between English and Spanish about when we say 
good , bueno , and when we say well, bien. But it's something you'll pick up listening. So here you 
would say well, it seems well to me , it seems good to me :  
S: Me parece bien .  
T: Good. Me parece bien . It doesn't seem good to me :  
S: No me parece bien .  
T: Good. No me pare ce bien . It doesn't seem good to her , or to him , or to you  (formal):  
S: No le parece bien .  
T: Good. Now let's make it a question. Doesn't it seem ok to you? :  
S: ¿No le parece bien ?  
T: Good. ¿ No le parece bien ? What was to interest ?  
S: Interesar .T: Interesar . How would you say it would interest me,  it would interest me ?  
S: Me interesaría .  
T: Good. It would interest me to see it :  
S: Me interesaría verlo .  
T: Good. To put , we said was poner . Poner .  
S: Poner .  
T: Poner . And we said that it's an i nteresting verb because when we have -pose inside a verb in 
English, we can change that -pose to poner  and we get the verb in Spanish. So for example, to 
compose  in Spanish is componer . And this com- is actually con-. The n changes next to the p, so 
it literally means “with putting”. To compose  is “with putting”, putting together. Compose , 
componer . To suppose :  
S: Suponer .  
T: Suponer . To oppose :  
S: Oponer .  
T: Oponer . To impose :  
S: Imponer .  
T: Good. So how would you say I want to put it here? I want t o put it here :  
S: Quiero ponerlo aquí .  
T: Good. Quiero ponerlo aquí . I would like to put it here.  It would please me :  
S: Me gustaría ponerlo aquí .  
T: Good. Now if you want to say I want to put salt on it , you don't need to say on. What do you think 
you can replace this on it with? So instead of saying on it, what do you think you might be able to 
say in Spanish? What is the word for it:  
S: Lo.T: And what do you think you could to do that to make it like on it? How do you say to it:  
S: Ah, lo.  
T: Th is is not how you say to it.  
S: No, it's not.  
T: Ah, so how do you say to it, for it, from it :  
S: Le.  
T: Le. So, if you want to say I want to put salt on it , you don't say on it, you just say le. Salt is sal, 
sal. So how would you say I want to put it salt, and with this it we mean on it.  
S: Quiero ponerle sal .    
T: Good. Quiero ponerle sal . I would like to put salt on it :  
S: Me gustaría ponerle sal .  
T: Good. Me gustaría ponerle sal . A little , a little is un poco . Un poco . Literally a little , un poc o.  
S: Un poco .  
T: Good. So you could say I would like to put it a little more , what was the word for more , like in 
more late ?  
S: Más.  
T: I would like to put it a little more salt , I would like to put on it a little more salt :  
S: Me gustaría ponerle un  poco más sal .  
T: Very good. Me gustaría ponerle un poco más sal . What if you wanted to say I would like to put 
on them a little more salt ? You know maybe you mean las papas fritas . The chips , the french 
fries. I would like to put on them a little more sa lt:  
S: Me gustaría ponerles un poco más sal .  
T: Very good. Me gustaría ponerles un poco más sal .