Track 46  
T: In English we have many ways to talk about the past. If you get any random verb like to eat , for 
example, you can say I ate . You can say I have eaten . You can say I was eating . You can say I 
used to eat . You can say I would eat an ice cream every week when I was a child , and there you 
use would  to speak about the past in English. I would go to the cinema every day when I was young . 
So we have many  different ways of talking about the past, but we can divide them into three. And 
in Spanish there are three. We have the I have eaten  past, which is the one that we learnt already. 
I have eaten , with haber . And then the other two pasts we can think of as a line in the past and a 
dot in the past. So, what would fit into the line in the past is I was eating , I used to eat , I would eat 
all the time when I was younger , all of that is ongoing. It’s like a line in the past. But then the dot 
in the past is I ate, finished. I ate, that’s your dot in the past. Those are what we will consider our 
three different pasts, which all of the different ways of expressing the past in English fit into, and 
in Spanish we have these three forms. The one we learnt already is I have eaten , for example. First 
we need to manage the verb to have . What is the verb for to have  in this context?  
S: Haber .  
T: Haber . Good. So we have haber , and we had a neat trick to find the different versions of haber , 
as we know it’s very irregular. S o what is I have ?  
S: He.  
T: Good. And we have :  
S: Hemos .  
T: Good. And what is he/she/it/you  (formal) have  or has?  
S: Ha.  
T: Good. And you, informally:  
S: Has.  
T: Good. And they have  or you guys have :  
S: Han.T: So that’s our panorama of haber . And then we need to find eaten . So, the version after haber , we 
want to think of it in this way, the version of the verb that comes after haber , rather than trying to 
translate eaten  because the version of the verb that comes after have  in English is oft en so different. 
I have wanted . I have been . Very different. But in Spanish, for –ar verbs we take off -ar and 
put -ado, and for –er/-ir verbs we take off the -er or -ir and we put -ido. So I have eaten :  
S: He comerido . Sorry, comido .  
T: Good. You’re tak ing off your ending and putting -ido. The only times we’re adding onto the “to” 
forms is with the futures, will and would . He comido . I have spoken :  
S: He hablado .  
T: He hablado . Good. I have danced :  
S: He bailado .  
T: Good. They have danced :  
S: Han ba ilado .  
T: Han bailado . The version that comes after haber : comido , bailado , doesn’t change for I or for 
we or for they or for he or she. Always the same. We need to focus on haber  to get the correct 
version of haber , and then we have the version of the ve rb that comes after it. So he bailado , han 
bailado , hemos bailado . We can also say more complicated things like I have been able to eat . 
What is to be able , related to power ?  
S: Poder .  
T: Poder . Good. So I have been able , the version that comes after haber. Rather than translating been 
able, we just want poder  after haber , so let’s do that first. I have been able :  
S: He podido .  
T: To eat :  
S: Comer .  
T: Good. He podido comer . I have been able to eat.  I haven’t been able to eat :S: No he podido comer .  
T: Good. No he podido comer . So we can make more interesting structures as well, like this, using 
haber . We can also put haber  in would  time, which gives us the opportunity to make some useful 
structures. What is our sound for would ?  
S: -ía.  
T: So I woul d have  from haber :  
S: Habría .  
T: Good. The /e/ fell out. Habría . What was to leave or to go out ?  
S: Salir .  
T: Salir . So you can say I would have gone out.  I would have gone out:   
S: He saliría ?  
T: So you’ve taken the sentence as a block to translate  it all together, and then you have this kind of 
salad situation where this -ía’s coming out in the wrong place. You must take the time to divide it 
up. I would have  is your first bit, and you stop there. I would have , what’s that?  
S: Habería . Habría .  
T: Habría . Good, and it’s a very natural irregularity. You can imagine many years of saying habería , 
habería , habería , habería , habería , it happens very naturally for that e to fall out. It only happens 
with a few verbs, though. Habría . So I would have gone out:  
S: Habría salido .  
T: Habría salido . Good. I would have been able to go out.  I would have been able to go out :  
S: Habría podido salir .  
T: Good. Habría podido salir . I wouldn’t have been able to go out.  I wouldn’t have been able to go 
out:  
S: No ha bría podido salir .T: Good. No habría podido salir . Good. So we have this haber  that we can use for the past, but then 
also we can make some other very useful structures out of it, like would have , would have been 
able, etc. So now we’re going to focus on  another past in Spanish. We’re going to focus now on 
the line in the past. So the line in the past representing I was eating , I used to eat , I would eat all 
the time , that would  that we use for past. All of those are represented by this line in the past. Now, 
for the pasts – for both pasts, the line and the point – again we are taking off our verb ending before 
we add on our endings for the past. So we have a verb like hablar , for example, an –ar verb, and 
we will take off this -ar and we will put -aba, -aba, to get I/he/she/it/you (formal). So again, like 
in would  time, we have I jumping in with he, she, it , and you (formal). So you have hablar , you 
take off the -ar and you put -aba:  
S: Hablaba .  
T: Hablaba . Hablaba . So hablaba  means I was speaking , I use d to speak , he was speaking , she was 
speaking , he used to speak , she used to speak , you were speaking , you used to speak , all of this in 
hablaba . Now you can probably make the other versions. How would you say you were speaking , 
speaking informally ?  
S: Hablabas .  
T: Good. And they or you guys were speaking :  
S: Hablaban .  
T: Hablaban . And for the we version, the accent’s going to stay in the same place on -aba. So how 
would you say we were speaking ?  
S: Hablábamos .  
T: Hablábamos . Good. To wait  is esperar . Esperar , to wait  or to hope .  
S: Esperar .  
T: So how would you say I was waiting , I used to wait ?  
S: Esperaba .T: Good. I was waiting for you , speaking informally? And we don’t need the for, no? I was awaiting 
you:  
S: Te esperaba .  
T: Te esp eraba . What if you were speaking formally? If you were speaking to usted  and you wanted 
to say I was waiting for you :  
S: Is it lo?  
T: Yes.  
S: Lo esperaba .  
T: Or to a female, it would be?  
S: La esperaba .  
T: Good. So lo and la other than it and he and she can also mean you (formal). We see those are 
always pairing together – he, she, it , and you (formal). Keeping it formal, speaking to usted , how 
would you say We were waiting for you ?  
S: Lo esperábamos .  
T: Good. Lo esperábamos . Very good. And what i f you wanted to say We were waiting for you guys ?  
S: Los esperábamos .  
T: Los esperábamos . And of course, this could also mean We were waiting for them . Los 
esperábamos . To try , related to intent:   
S: Intentar .  
T: Good. Intentar . So how would you say I was trying ?  
S: Intentaba .  
T: Good. Intentaba . He was trying :  
S: Intentaba .  
T: Good. What was to find , to encounter ?S: Encontrar .  
T: Good. So how would you say They were trying to find it? They were trying to find it:  so divide up 
the thoughts. They were trying , the first bit :  
S: Intentaba ? It’s intentaban .  
T: Good.  
S: Encontrarlo .  
T: Good. Intentaban encontrarlo . If you wanted to say They were trying to find it for me , the most 
natural way of saying this in Spanish is They were trying to f ind me it . They were trying to find me 
it:  
S: Intentaban encontrármelo .  
T: Intentaban encontrármelo . Good. They were trying to find me it.  But if you wanted to emphasize 
They were trying to find me it, then you could say this sentence in the way that we would probably 
say it in English, which is They were trying to find it for me.  Then you could do that in Spanish. 
You have that option. So how would you say that? They were trying to find it for me , using the 
word for:  
S: Intentaban encontrarlo para mí .  
T: Good. Intentaban encontrarlo para mí . So here we are emphasizing, actually me. But mostly in 
Spanish we kind of avoid the use of the preposition, as we’ve been noticing. Intentaban 
encontrármelo .