Track 47  
T: The dinner  in Spanish is la cena , spel t c-e-n-a, la cena .  
S: La cena .  
T: La cena . Those in Spain will pronounce /la thena/. So la cena , the dinner . Now, to dine , which 
doesn’t sound formal in Spanish as it does in English, to dine , you just make la cena  into a verb.  
So how do you think that wou ld sound?  
S: Cenar .  
T: Cenar . Good. So cenar  is to dine . So how would you say I was dining,  or more naturally in 
English, I was having dinner ?  
S: Cenaba .  
T: Good. Cenaba . Now, apart from I was having dinner , what else can that mean? Cenaba ?  
S: He/sh e/it were having dinner.   
T: And? Who else?  
S: You (formal).  
T: Good. So we have all of those meanings there with the -aba. So for this line in the past we have -aba 
for -ar verbs. We are taking off our -ar and we're putting -aba as our key sound, and th en we are 
adding on more, so n or s. Quemar , q-u-e-m-a-r, quemar in Spanish is to burn.   
S: Quemar .  
T: Quemar . Good. How would you say He was burning the dinner ? He was burning the dinner :  
S: Quemaba la cena .  
T: Good. Quemaba la cena . And if you wanted to show that it was he that was burning the dinner, 
how would you do that?  
S: Just él. Él quemaba la cena .  
T: Good. And if you wanted to show that it was you (formal), You were burning the dinner :S: Usted quemaba la cena .  
T: Good. Usted quemaba la cena . Good. So Él quemaba la cena , he was burning , and then we say 
what he was burning : the dinner . If we want to say The dinner was burning , The dinner was getting 
burnt , we can’t just say La cena quemaba , because we are waiting to hea r what was the dinner 
burning? It feels incomplete. So if you want to just say The dinner was burning , like The dinner 
was getting burnt , in Spanish we are going to say The dinner was burning itself . What is itself ?  
S: Se.  
T: Se. So how would you say The dinner was burning , The dinner was getting burnt , The dinner was 
burning itself ?  
S: La cena se quemaba .  
T: Very good. That’s it! La cena se quemaba . Good. The position of la cena  is also flexible. You 
can say La cena se quemaba  or you can put la cena  afterwards. How would that be?  
S: Se quemaba la cena .  
T: Se quemaba la cena . So it’s flexible, unlike in English, because in English, well we don’t really 
change verbs so much. There are not so many grammatical resources in English as there are in 
Spanish, for example, so in English the word order is much more important than in Spanish to 
show what’s going on. So we can say La cena se quemaba  or Se quemaba la cena . Because we 
have se, we understand that the dinner was getting burnt, there was nobody el se there involved. If 
you want to say I burn , like in the sun, in the sense of, you know, I get burnt , you’re also going to 
use this structure, no? You’re going to say I burn myself in the sun . Now you understand you’re 
not burning yourself, it just means I get burnt . So sun is sol. In was:  
S: En.  
T: En. So I get burnt , I burn in the sun , how would that be? And sun is masculine.  
S: Me quemo en el sol .  
T: Good. Me quemo en el sol . You can’t just say Quemo en el sol , because this would mean that I 
burn so mething in the sun , and we will be waiting to hear what you burn in the sun. Me quemo 
en el sol . If you want to say The sun burns me , this is another way you could put the sentence, andthere we are not using this “self” structure, because we have The sun burns  and then we have me 
telling us what it burns, so it’s complete. So how would you say that, the sun burns me ?  
S: El sol me quema .  
T: Good. El sol me quema . Me quema el sol . Either way. Another example of a verb like this is 
romper . Romper . Romper  means – maybe you can guess it. What do you think romper  means?  
It’s quite obscure, the connection, but you might find it. Rupture ?  
S: To break.   
T: To break . Romper , to break . So how would you say I break ?  
S: Rompo .  
T: Rompo , with a p, rompo . I brea k it:  
S: Lo rompo .  
T: Lo rompo . Good. I break it . If you want to say it breaks , like it gets broken , it breaks all the time . 
All the time  is todo el tiempo . Literally all, todo , el tiempo , the time . Todo , t-o-d-o, is all. So It 
breaks all the time , It breaks itself , it gets broken , all the time . How would you say that? It breaks 
all the time :  
S: Se rompa todo  –  
T: The se got your attention, so you forgot to do something very important, which was to quickly go 
back to the “to” form and be clear on what t ype of verb you’re working with.  
S: Se rompe todo el tiempo .  
T: Good. Se rompe todo el tiempo . It breaks all the time . So here we understand that it gets broken, 
it breaks itself . How would you say they break all the time ?  
S: It’s rompen . And, Se romp en todo el tiempo .  
T: Se rompen todo el tiempo . They break themselves , not literally that they are breaking themselves, 
just they get broken . We don’t have this get in Spanish, and this is how we get around it.  
What was tonight ?S: Esta noche .  
T: Esta noche . So we said esta is this for feminine words. Esta noche . What was this for masculine 
words? How did we say this car ?  
S: Este auto .  
T: Este auto. Este coche . Good. So este is this for masculine words. And we have the /e/ of el, like 
el auto , in este. Este auto . These cars  are estos autos . So we go from este to estos  for the plural.  
Not estes . Ah? Estos . Estos autos .  
S: Estos autos .  
T: Now this might look irregular, but there is a logic there, it’s just different to the one that we might 
expect. We  have the /e/ of el in este, and we have the /os/ of los in estos . So we have the car :  
S: El coche .  
T: Good. And this car :  
S: Este coche.   
T: Good. The car s:  
S: Los coches .  
T: Los coches . And these cars :  
S: Estos coches .  
T: Estos coches . So we have /os/ in los and estos , and we have /e/ in el and este. All of those you can 
make that and those  now, just by plucking out the t. So if este auto  is this car , how do you say 
that car ?  
S: Ese auto .  
T: Ese auto . If estos  coches  or estos  autos  are these cars , how would you say those cars ?  
S: Esos autos .T: Esos autos . Good. So how would you say those ones  and for those ones  you can just use this word 
for those  and imagine me talking about masculine things or mixed things, things of mixed gender. 
Those ones break all the time, those ones break all the time :  
S: Esos rompen todo el tiempo .  
T: So now I’m waiting to hear what they break. Esos rompen todo el tiempo .  
S: Ah.  
T: What do they break all the time?  
S: Esos se rompen todo el tiempo .  
T: Good. Esos se rompen todo el tiempo . So you will have to listen out in Spanish for these verbs 
that want you to show it when their action isn’t to something else. It’s transforming , not something 
else, se transforma . It breaks , it’s breaking , not something else, se rompe . It’s changing , not 
something else, but here you don’t need it. Cambia , from cambiar . Cambia . Being aware that 
this occurs is enough, and we will listen out and in real life get a conscious understanding and also 
an intuition about where we n eed to do this.