Track 5  
T: You might have noticed we are not using the word for I. Quiero  by itself means I want . There is a 
word for I, the word for I is yo. Y-o.  
S: Yo.  
T: You only use it if y ou want to be emphatic. So if you want to say “ I want ”, to show that emphasis, 
how would you do it?  
S: Yo quiero.   
T: Yo quiero . I don’t want:   
S: No yo quiero.   
T: The same order as English. I don’t want:   
S: Yo no quiero.   
T: Good, yo no quiero . I don’t  want . Good, I don’t want to cancel:   
S: Yo no quiero cancelar.   
T: Good. Yo no quiero cancelar . How would you say celebration ?  
S: Celebración.   
T: Celebración,  very good. And to celebrate ?  
S: Celebrar.   
T: Celebrar . I want to celebrate:   
S: Quiero celeb rar.  
T: Quiero celebrar,  good. What would it mean if I say: Quiero ilustrar . Quiero ilustrar.   
S: I want to illustrate.   
T: Yes! I want to illustrate . This is an interesting word as well, actually. The lus inside of ilustrar  
means light, and the word luz, l-u-z, (so actually this z would be pronounced /th/ in most of Spain- /looth / - but in the rest of Spanish -speaking world /loos/ ) means light so you can use that word 
as well. How would you say I want to find out ? Now in Spanish you will say so mething  like I want 
to inform myself . I want to inform myself:   
S: Quiero informarme.   
T: Good, very good. Quiero informarme . So how was information ?  
S: Información.   
T: Información , very good. What was you, in the sense of I love you , I want you ?  
S: Te.  
T: And this is informal you, this is used informally. How would you say then I don’t want to oblige 
you? You might think “I don’t know this!” It’s very important, sentences that we think we don’t 
know, to take them block by block. And in this way we wi ll realise we can say so much in Spanish 
that we would have assumed that we don’t know how to say. So the first bit is I don’t want .  
S: No quiero.   
T: No quiero . To oblige ? So we look to see if we have obligation  in English: we have it, it’s a word.  
It’s legal, so how is that?  
S: Obligación.   
T: Obligación . And to oblige  then?  
S: Obligar.   
T: Obligar.  So we don’t want to jump from oblige  to sticking -ar on it. We want to take that long 
route. Obligation , obligación , obligar . And then we find the word in  Spanish. So, I don’t want , 
no quiero , to oblige you:   
S: No quiero obligarte.   
T: Good, no quiero obligarte . I don’t want to oblige you. I don’t want to make you do it.  So inEnglish we would say make you , maybe. Maybe oblige  sounds a little bit too form al, but in Spanish 
it's everyday language. How would you say I don’t want to provoke you ? I don’t want to provoke 
you:  
S: No quiero provocarte.   
T: Good, no quiero provocarte . The word for it in Spanish is lo.  
S: Lo.  
T: Lo. So how would you say I want t o cancel it ?  
S: Quiero cancelarlo.   
T: Good, quiero cancelarlo . How would you say I want to regulate it ?  
S: Quiero regularlo.   
T: Good. I want to talk about this r. An initial r, like in regular  in most Spanish dialects, it's a rolling 
r. You get this fl ick of the tongue, regular . Real, we saw this as well in real, real.  Now, if you 
can’t make that sound, I don’t want you to worry about it yet, it’s something that I couldn’t 
pronounce it actually, I couldn’t pronounce it for a long time, and it was really  frustrating, and I 
was trying to pronounce it, and when you are trying to pronounce it your mouth gets tense and 
actually you need a very relaxed mouth to pronounce this r because you are kind of lifting your 
tongue up a little bit and letting the air fla p it. Now that’s a muscle. If it’s tense the air can’t flap 
it. So I tried a very long time, I got very frustrated and I gave up and then I was practising Spanish 
in Peru, one day I started speaking about rice, which is arroz  and the r came out all by itse lf and I 
was so excited that I was jumping up and down saying arroz arroz arroz  and then I heard “the 
gringo is hungry”. My advice if you can’t pronounce this sound is just to let it come. The more 
you hear, just because you want to pronounce it it’s going  to come. So initial r or two r's together 
inside the word is going to pronounce this double r. So, the word for but in Spanish is pero .  
S: Pero.   
T: P-e-r-o. And the word for dog is perro . P-e-r-r-o.  
S: Perro.T: So that’s the difference. You have norm al r: pero .  
S: Pero.   
T: And it’s a bit different to English because it’s still kind of more pronounced. You know you are 
still using your tongue more there. Pero . And then perro , you keep that in the same position that 
you are using to make that Spanish r which is kind of a little bit more pronounced than the /r-r-r/ 
English sound , but you pass a little bit of air over it and you let that flick it. Perro.   
S: Perro.   
T: Now, like I said, I don’t want you to worry about if you can’t pronounce this, there  are even native 
Spanish speakers that can’t pronounce this, so it’s really something I don’t want to inhibit anybody. 
How do you think is salvation  in Spanish?  
S: Salvación.   
T: Salvación.  So how do you think would be to save ?  
S: Salvar.   
T: Salvar . Thi s word that we used for it, lo, can also mean him. So how would you say I want to save 
him?  
S: Quiero salvarlo.   
T: Good, quiero salvarlo . I want to save him . How would you say situation ?  
S: Situación.   
T: Situación.  Good, now if you turn that into a ver b you actually get to situate , to place, to put 
somewhere. So how would that be?  
S: Situar.   
T: Situar . Good, participation:   
S: Participación.   
T: Participación . To participate:S: Partipi…   
T: So, take it syllable by syllable. This is very important, s o it doesn ’t become like a salad. You want 
to take it syllable by syllable.  
S: Participation -participación -partipisar .  
T: Slower.  
S: Participar.   
T: Participar.  So we must take it slowly, sometimes you don’t need to take it slowly , but we want to 
get in the habit of taking it slowly, dividing up syllable by syllable. We want to install the correct 
process slowly. We don’t want to jump from participate  to participar  because maybe we end up 
putting some extra sound “ participatar ” or something like this a nd we don’t want to do this. We 
want to take the long route. So for example , if you want to work out how to say to create  in Spanish 
you want to go through the long way, you want to go through creation .  
S: Creación.   
T: And then?  
S: Crear.   
T: Yeah. A nd that’s it, that’s the verb in Spanish. Crear , to create . How is to experiment ?  
S: So it’s experimentation . Experimentación -experimentar .  
T: Yeah, that’s it. Experimentar.  And this also means to experience . To experiment and to 
experience , which is a little bit of wisdom that I really like there from Spanish because your 
experience is like an experiment. If you think that your relationship with experience is scientific, 
you look what happens and you learn from it, or at least you should. So in Spanish,  there is a 
suggestion of that in the fact that these words are the same, to experience and to experiment  is the 
same verb, experimentar . The nouns are different. Experience  is experiencia , experiment  is 
experimento . But the verb, the act, is the same verb , experimentar . Actually this gives us another  
nice rule: experience , experiencia . If we have a word that ends in –ence or –ance , we can change 
–ence to –encia  and –ance  to –ancia,  and we will get the word in Spanish. Difference ?S: Diferencia.   
T: Good. Influence:   
S: Influencia.   
T: Yeah, Existence:   
S: Existencia.   
T: Good! Consistence:   
S: Consi.. Consi… Consistencia.   
T: Good, Inconsistence:   
S: Inconsistencia.   
T: Good, Incongruence:   
S: Incongruencia.   
T: Yes.