Track 51  
T: What was I am, from estar ? I am:  
S: Estoy .  
T: Estoy . If you want to say I’m there for you , I’m there for you , you know, in this supportive way, 
you don’t have to say there  to begin with. Because we are using estar  and not ser, it kind of makes 
that there  a little redundant. We feel that already in estar  that’s referring to states, locations and 
states, so we don’t need to say there . We can just say I’m for you, I’m for  you, using estar . What 
for do you think you need?  
S: Para .  
T: Good. So how would you say I’m there for you , talking to a friend?  
S: Estoy para ti.  
T: Estoy para ti . Good. To say I’m here because of you , then we are not going to use para . We don’t 
even really need to say here.  
S: If it’s still estoy  it still implies location.  
T: It kind of just gives you the feeling. Actually, when you knock on somebody’s door and you are 
calling for them, you will just say ¿Estás?  You don’t say Are you there?  Or if you’re on internet, 
¿Estás?  you will write in the messenger. If you call somebody up and you want to speak to Juan, 
you will not say Is Juan there?  You will just say ¿Está Juan? ¿Juan está?  So, I am here because 
of you  (formal):  
S: Estoy por usted.  
T: Good. Estoy por usted . For you  (informal):  
S: Estoy por ti.  
T: Estoy por ti . So this would be because of you . How would you say I have come because of you, I 
have come because of you ( informal ). I have come because of you :  
S: Ah, the first bit  is he. He venido por ti.T: He venido por ti . So whenever we want because of , we want to avoid the temptation to translate 
porque de , because of . Good. So I have come because of you , he venido por ti . You could also 
say It is because of you that we have come , for example. It is because of you that we have come.  
And of course we can make this sentence perfectly if we think it through piece by piece. So, it is 
because of you :  
S: Es por ti.  
T: That we have come :  
S: Que hemos venido.  
T: Good. Es por ti qu e hemos venido . It is because of you that we have come.  Good. Another use of 
por – so we are seeing that por is much more flexible than para  – another use of por is if you 
want to say for in the sense of exchanging this one for that one, to exchange someth ing for 
something else, then also we use por. Cambiar , cambiar , means to change . If you want to say, I 
would change this one for that one , I would change this one for that one, and with this one  and 
that one  let’s refer to a masculine thing. So, I would ch ange  is the first step.  
S: Cambiaría ?  
T: Uh -huh. This one , a masculine thing:  
S: Este.  
T: Good. For that one , masculine thing.  
S: Por ese.  
T: Good. Take away the t. Good. Cambiaría este por ese . I would change this one for that one.  How 
would you say  I would change these ones for those ones , masculine or mixed objects? I would 
change these ones for those ones:   
S: Cambiaría estos por esos.  
T: Good. Cambiaría estos por esos . Very good. What if they were feminine things?  
S: Cambiaría estas por esas.T: Good. Cambiaría estas por esas . Good. Would you change these ones for those ones?  Speaking 
informally. Would you change these ones for those ones? , still feminine things:  
S: ¿Cambiarías estas por esas?  
T: Good. ¿ Cambiarías estas por esas ? Wouldn’t yo u change these ones for those ones? , still 
feminine:  
S: ¿No cambiarías estas por esas?  
T: Good. Go on…   
S: ¿Por qué no cambiaría estas por esas ?   
T: Still think it through though.  
S: Sorry, ¿ Por qué no cambiarías estas por esas ?  
T: Good. We don’t wan t to stop thinking. You will be able to relax that as you go on, but at the 
beginning you want to be very insistent on your thinking  so you install correct structural habits or 
grammatical habits. We don’t really use much grammatical terminology, but e verything we’re 
seeing here is grammar, of course. It’s all structure. Ah, something I should mention is that if 
you’re chatting online, if you’re practicing your Spanish online you might see por written as an x 
as a shortcut. Because por is also what you use in, like, times tables. Ocho por ocho  is eight times 
eight . So you might see gracias por venir as gracias x venir . And if you have the habit of writing 
kisses with an x this can be very confusing to Spanish speakers. So gracias por venir  reminds us, 
this nice hook, that we will hear a lot, gracias por venir , reminds us that we have two words for 
for. Para,  something being for you , quite literally, and then por, which is much more flexible in 
meaning. The other thing that we learn from the sentence graci as por venir  is that after 
prepositions, so these little group of words, we’ve seen - para , por, de, en, con, a, we’ve seen 
quite a few of them - following these words in English we put -ing. Thank you for coming.  But in 
Spanish we just put the “to” form. Gracias por venir. So how would you say thank you for calling , 
thank you for calling  - if you forget call you can think of what’s your name?  or how are you called?  
because it’s something that people tend to have heard somewhere.  
S: Gracias por llamar.T: Good. Gracias por llamar . And if you wanted to say thanks for calling me  you could say that as 
well.  
S: Gracias por llamarme.  
T: Good. Gracias por llamarme . So after prepositions we don’t use the -ing. We want to resist any 
temptation to put the -ing form after the preposition. This is negative language transfer, things that 
are not the same between English and Spanish. What was I am from estar ?  
S: Estoy .  
T: Estoy . And you remember how to say tired  in Spanish?  
S: Cansado .  
T: Good. Cansado . So how do you say I am tired ?  
S: Estoy cansado.  
T: But you being a female?  
S: Cansada .  
T: Good. Estoy cansada . So if you want to say I’m tired of  – dancing , cooking , cleaning  – it’s all 
going to be with the “to” form. What was to work ?  
S: Trabajar .  
T: Trab ajar. How would you say I’m tired of working ?  
S: Estoy cansada de trabajar.  
T: Yes. Estoy cansada de trabajar.  Good. For one of the pasts that we saw, for the line in the past, 
so when we’re referring to like a period of time in the past, for –ar verbs  we have the -aba base 
ending. So how would you say I was  from estar ?  
S: Estaba .  
T: Estaba . I was tired of working :  
S: Estaba cansada de trabajar.T: Estaba cansada de trabajar . Good. I was tired of working.  Good. We were tired of working , and 
let’s be a masculine or a mixed group. We were tired of working :  
S: Estábamos cansados de trabajar.  
T: Very good. Estábamos cansados de trabajar.  Good. If you want to say something like it’s a way 
of doing it , it’s a way of doing it,  the word for way is form , a form of doing it , and how do you 
think form  might be in Spanish if you had to guess it?  
S: Forma .  
T: Yes. Forma . Good. So how would you say a way of doing it ? What was to do  or to make ?  
S: Hacer .  
T: It is a way of doing it :  
S: Es una forma de hacerlo.  
T: Good. Es una forma de hacerlo . Good. I don’t believe in arguing like this , in this way . I don’t 
believe in arguing in this way.  So, to believe  is creer , creer  and it has two e's, c-r-e-e-r, creer.   
S: Creer .  
T: So how do you say I don’t be lieve ?  
S: No creo.  
T: No creo . What was creation ?  
S: Creación .  
T: And what was to create ?  
S: Crear .  
T: And what was I create ?  
S: Creo .T: Yes. So we get this situation occasionally in Spanish that the “ I” form of two different verbs will 
look the same. Creo , of course, could be from creer , to believe , or from crear , to create . So, I 
don’t believe :  
S: No creo.  
T: In arguing . So to argue  in Spanish you can use to discuss . This is the most common verb, actually, 
that’s used for argue . Discuss  is discutir , discutir .  
S: So what do they use for discuss ?  
T: Hablar , mostly, but you can use discutir  as well for discuss , but it has a heavy connotation mostly. 
No? I mean, if you argue with your boyfriend or your girlfriend you use discutir , you say this. 
Argüir , which is argue , means to argue a point, rather than to get in an argument. Discutir  is more 
like to get in an argument. So it’s what we can call a false friend, words that look like they are the 
same, but they have a difference in meaning,  and there are a few of them. We need to watch out 
for them between English and Spanish. Another example would be actual , which doesn’t mean 
actual , it means current , no? Mi trabajo actual , my current job . Actualmente  means currently , 
at the moment , rather  than actually . Mostly the vocabulary, the Latin English that we turn into 
Spanish , is very reliable, but there are a few words that we want to watch out for. Discutir  is one 
of them. This doesn’t really mean to discuss  as much as it does to argue . So, I don’t believe in 
arguing :  
S: No creo en discutir.  
T: Good. In this way , we will say of this way  rather than in this way .  
S: De esta forma.  
T: Good. So all together, I don’t believe in arguing , in discussing , in this way :  
S: No creo en discutir de esta forma.  
T: Good. No creo en discutir de esta forma . Good. So with this sentence, gracias por venir , we are 
reminded how we have two words for for, por and para , and we need to have a think and decide 
which one we think is most appropriate before we transla te for. And that after prepositions we 
don’t need to worry about making the -ing form of the verb, we just use the “to” form.