Track 52  
T: Para , this for, para , can also mean in order to,  in order to . So in a sentence, for example, We have 
spoken in order  to resolve it . We have spoken in order to resolve it. Now in English we could just 
say We have spoken to resolve it , no? We don’t need to say in order to . But whenever we have this 
to meaning in order to , we want to translate this as para  in Spanish. So l et’s make this sentence. 
First bit is We have spoken. We have spoken :  
S: Hemos hablado.  
T: Hemos hablado . To resolve it  – in order to resolve it . Now, to resolve  is resolver.  Ah? The same 
word, resolver . So We have spoken in order to resolve it :  
S: Hemo s hablado para resolverlo.  
T: Good. Hemos hablado para resolverlo . Good. So whilst the to of to resolve , resolver , would fit 
nicely here, I mean if we were to translate directly from English, We have spoken to resolve it , it 
doesn’t work in Spanish. Whene ver this to means in order to , we must put that para . Hemos 
hablado para resolverlo . You could say We have spoken in order to try to resolve it . What was 
to try ? Related to intention :  
S: Intentar .  
T: Good. We have spoken in order to try to resolve it :  
S: Hemos hablado para intentar resolvar – resolverlo.  
T: Good. Hemos hablado para intentar resolverlo . So only when the to implies in order to  we want 
to put para . The “ to” form of the verb in Spanish is not enough to include that meaning. We must 
put para . So for example, if you want to say I’m here to see you , does it mean I’m here in order 
to see you ?  
S: Yes.  
T: Good. So I am here to see you  (informally):  
S: Estoy aquí para verte.T: Good. Estoy aquí para verte . This is also something we could learn o r interiorize through the 
negative language transfer that some Spanish speakers make when they speak English. For 
example, you might hear a Spanish speaker say I am here for see you  or for seeing you . You might 
hear a Spanish speaker, especially with basic  English, making this mistake. Now once you’ve 
heard that a few times, you would say, “Oh, maybe this is how you say it in Spanish.” So we don’t 
want to forget this opportunity, the opportunity to learn from the negative language transfer, the 
mistakes tha t Spanish speakers make in English , which originate from Spanish. Once you hear the 
same mistake a few times, you can assume it probably comes from Spanish. I have called you in 
order to speak about it : so the first bit is I have called you,  I have phoned , I have called  
(informally):  
S: He llamado . Ah, sorry. Te he llamado.  
T: In order to speak about it :  
S: Para hablarlo.  
T: Good.  
S: We don’t use about .  
T: No. Good. Te he llamado para hablarlo . So if we take the sentence in English, I have called you  
to speak about it , and we translate it directly, then we will say Te he llamado hablarlo . But when 
our to means in order to , we must put this para . Te he llamado para hablarlo . I have called you 
in order to speak about it . Good. What was to be , for states ?  
S: Estar .  
T: Estar . And we said that we can use this to express when we are doing something right now. We 
can say, instead of I eat, como,  I am eating , using this structure with estar  and then the -ing form 
of the verb. Do you remember how you would ge t the -ing form of comer , for example? Of –er or 
–ir verbs?  
S: Comiendo ?  
T: Comiendo .  
S: Comiendo .T: Good. Comiendo . So we add on -iendo  for –er/-ir verbs and for –ar verbs we add on?  
S: -ando .  
T: Good. So how would you say I am eating ?  
S: Estoy comiendo.   
T: Estoy comiendo . And this means right now, no? I am speaking :  
S: Estoy hablando.  
T: Estoy hablando . I am explaining it : to explain  – we would go from explanation  but explanation  
is an exception. It’s not “explanación” in Spanish as we might hope, it’s explicación . And we see 
we even have that / k/ sound in explain, explicación , we have it in English as well in inexplicable , 
for example we say in English.  Inexplicable  in Spanish. So we can see where that sound’s coming 
from. So how is explanati on or explication  in Spanish?  
S: Explicación .  
T: Good. And to explain :  
S: Explicar .  
T: Explicar . Good. So I’m explaining it  and you mean right now?  
S: Estoy explicándolo.   
T: Estoy explicándolo. Lo estoy explicando.  The lo can go on the end of a “to” form, but it can also 
go on the end of one of these -ando  or -iendo  forms as well. So you have the option. Lo estoy 
explicando. Estoy explicándolo . And you mean right now. Actually in explicar , we get 
this -plicar  from “plicare“ that we mentioned before, m eaning to fold  in Latin. So explicar , to 
explain , to unfold . You might want to say I’m taking a Spanish course . Even if you’re not in the 
course right now in this moment, when we are taking a course, in our minds there’s a period of 
time in which we are  taking a course and when we say it we’re in that period of time. If I say I’m 
taking a Spanish course , maybe I mean for three months and I’m in that period. Do you remember 
what to take  was? We used it with to take a photo . Tomar .  
S: Tomar .T: Tomar . So tomar  is to take . So I am taking :  
S: Estoy tomando.  
T: Good. Estoy tomando . A course : I’m going to let you guess it.  
S: Una corsa?  
T: Close. It’s not with a, it’s with o.  
S: Un corso.  
T: Un curso , with a u. Un curso . Good. Of Spanish , this is how yo u would say a Spanish course , a 
course of Spanish .  
S: Un curso de español.  
T: Very good. Estoy tomando un curso de español . Good. Now, what if we put this estoy  in the 
past tense that we learnt? The past tense that is -aba or -ía. I was taking a Spanish course :  
S: Estar, estaba.  
T: Good.  
S: Estaba tomando un curso de español.  
T: Good. Estaba tomando un curso de español . Which means we actually have two ways of saying 
I was taking . We can say estaba tomando or we can just use tomar and use that line in  the past. 
How would that sound?  
S: Tomaba .  
T: Yes. So both tomaba  and estaba tomando mean I was taking . So you have that option. Estaba 
tomando un curso de español or tomaba un curso de español . What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . How would you say  I was eating ?  
S: Comía .  
T: Comía . Or? How else could you say it?S: Estaba comiendo.  
T: So you have this option. Comía  or estaba comiendo . Most of the time they’re interchangeable, 
sometimes one might fit slightly better than the other and it’s some thing you will pick up very 
naturally when you’re practicing. So if in one situation people tend to use estaba comiendo rather 
than comía , you will pick it up. So we have -ando  and -iendo  to form this -ing. And we saw in 
Spanish that we don’t use it after prepositions. You don’t use this -ing either if you say something 
like swimming is healthy  or running is healthy . You don’t use the -ing there either. You will just 
say to run is healthy , to swim is healthy . If you hear people toast in Spanish you might he ar them 
say salud , which means health . Healthy  is saludable.  To dance is healthy :  
S: Bailar es saludable.  
T: Good. Bailar es saludable . Good. To swim  is nadar . Nadar . To swim is healthy :  
S: Nadar es saludable.  
T: Nadar es saludable . So we’re seeing tha t we don’t use the -ing in Spanish as much as we do in 
English. Sometimes in English we make an adjective with -ing. We go from to interest  to 
interesting . When we do this in English, this -ing that we use in English to form an adjective, in 
Spanish it’s -ante for –ar verbs and -iente  for –er/-ir verbs. So for example, we have to interest , 
what was to interest ?  
S: Interesar .  
T: Good. Interesar . So if you get rid of -ar and you put -ante, you get that -ing adjective, interesting .  
So how would you say interesting ?  
S: Interesante .  
T: Interesante . Good. So when you make an adjective with -ing in English from the verb, you can 
just replace it with -ante or -iente . How would you say to irritate  in Spanish? And you can go from 
irritation :  
S: Irritación. I rritar.  
T: Irritar . So if you want to say irritating :S: Irritante .  
T: Irritante . It is irritating :  
S: Es irritante.  
T: Good. Es irritante . Good. How would you say to frustrate  in Spanish?  
S: Ah, frustration . Frustación . Frustar .  
T: Frustrar .  
S: Frustrar .  
T: Yes, because you have the two r's, no? Frustrate . Frustrate , Frustrar . Frustrating :  
S: Frustrante .  
T: Frustrante . Good. To wane , to wane , to reduce  in size, in Spanish this is menguar . Menguar .  
S: Menguar .  
T: When the moon gets smaller, it’ s waning. And the moon  is la luna .  
S: La luna.  
T: La luna . So how would you say the waning moon ?  
S: La luna menguante.  
T: Good. So there we’re making waning  like an adjective, not like the verb, not menguando . Ah? 
Menguante, la luna menguante . Luna  is an interesting word. I don’t know if you ever noticed, 
like, in English Monday  is “moon day”. It’s not very obvious in English that the days of the week 
relate back to the planets. But in Spanish it’s very obvious. You have la luna , the moon , and then 
you have lunes , Monday . Tuesday  is martes . And Mars  is marte , planeta  marte . Wednesday  in 
Spanish is miércoles . What planet does that sound like?  
S: Mercury .  
T: Yes. Jueves  in Spanish is spelt with a j:  
S: Jupiter .T: Jupiter . Viernes  is Friday :  
S: Venu s.  
T: Venus . So you can see much clearer there how our days of the week are named after planets. To 
live was vivir . V-i-v-i-r. So vivir  is to live .  
S: Vivir .  
T: Good. We have two “to be”s, we have estar  for states, and for characteristics we have?  
S: Ser.  
T: Ser. And we said that un ser , un ser , means a being , that we can use ser like a noun and we get a 
being . So a human being  is?  
S: Un ser humano.  
T: Un ser humano . You could also say a living being, a living being :  
S: Un ser vivir.  
T: How do you get this –  
S: Vivo .  
T: You could say un ser vivo . Vivo  is also like an adjective, which means alive . But living  is adjective 
that we make with -ing. We can build it from vivir . For –ar verbs we have -ante and for –er/-ir 
verbs we have -iente .  
S: Un ser viviente.  
T: Good. Un ser viviente . A living being . What was to go out  or to leave ?  
S: Voy?  
T: To go out  or to leave . So it’s “ to”. I don’t care if it’s wrong, but I want it to end in r.  
S: Ah, salir . Salir .  
T: Salir . Now we have in English, you mi ght have heard, salient , which means kind of protruding or 
outstanding, or something that stands out or sticks out or protrudes. This is a Latin -English versionof this -ante/-iente  rule. So we can see it even in English. How would salient  be in Spanish? Y ou 
can go from salient  or you can go from salir .  
S: Saliente .  
T: Saliente . Good.