Track 53  
T: What was to be able , can, in the “to” form?  
S: Poder .  
T: Poder . So we have poder . If we want to make could , we have two different could 's. We have the 
could  that refers to the past, I couldn't do it yesterday . And we have a could  that refers to the future: 
but I could do it tomorrow . This future could  - we learned it already from to be able , would be 
able: poder , “podería” and the e fell out podría . If we want  to say I could  in the past, most of the 
time we will probably find ourselves using this line past that we learned. The past that we make 
with -aba for -ar verbs and -ía for -er/-ir verbs. So how would you say I could , referring to past? 
I could, I was abl e to:  
S: Podía .  
T: Podía . So this is I was able to, I could . The past could , podía . We could :  
S: Podíamos .  
T: Good. I couldn't do it because I didn't have the time.  For both of these we can use that line in the 
past, that ongoing past, even though we'r e not using it in English. I couldn't do it because I didn't 
have the time.  So the first bit is I couldn't do it :  
S: No podía hacerlo .  
T: Good. No podía hacerlo . Because :  
S: Porque .  
T: I didn't have the time :  
S: No tenía el tiempo .  
T: Good. No podía hacerlo porque no tenía el tiempo . So we're going to contrast much more how 
we use this line and this dot in the past when we look at that dot. So what we're seeing for now - 
even though we haven't looked at the dot yet - that the decisions that we need to  make in Spanish 
about whether we will use this line in the past, this ongoing past, or this dot, this point in the past,is a decision based on context rather than identifying which one we're using in English and then 
translating it. So we can begin to lo ok at that even before we've learned the dot in the past.  
The word for yesterday  was ayer . Ayer .  
S: Ayer .  
T: Good. So how would you say, I couldn't do it yesterday ?  
S: No podía hacerlo ayer.  
T: Good. No podía hacerlo ayer . And when we learn the dot form of the past, we will see that we 
could have used that one as well. Sometimes they're interchangeable. Sometimes this dot and this 
line form are not interchangeable. For example, if we want to use haber  to say I had eaten  rather 
than I have eaten , I had gone already , rather than I have gone , then we always use the line in the 
past. Always. So from haber , how do you say I had ?  
S: Había .  
T: Había , good. So if you want to say I had eaten , how would you say it?  
S: Would you say, “ había comer ”?  
T: You have a version of the verb that comes after haber , no matter what version of haber  we have, 
había , habría, he,  it doesn't matter.  
S: Comido. Había comido .  
T: Good. Había comido . The word for already  in Spanish is ya. Y-a. Ya.  
S: Ya.  
T: And it tends to  go at the beginning. That would be the least emphatic place, the most natural place. 
So how would you say I had eaten already ?  
S: Ya había comido.  
T: Good. Ya había comido . So you could say, he wanted to dine with me, but  I had dined already .  
So, he wanted , what is to want ?S: Querer .  
T: Querer . So, he wanted . Again we're using the line in the past, because even though in English 
there we are using the dot - we're not saying he was wanting, he used to want - with querer  we 
can use the line withou t any problem because most of the time, when you want something, it's not 
just for an instant, it's kind of an ongoing feeling. The dinner was la cena . What was to dine , or to 
have dinner ?  
S: Cenar ?  
T: Yes. He wanted to dine with me :  
S: Quería cenar con mí?  
T: And this was a bit of an exception. You do not say “con mí”, you say:  
S: Ah, conmigo .  
T: Good. Quería cenar conmigo , but I had already had dinner. I had dined already :  
S: Pero ya había cenado.  
T: Good. But if you say, quería cenar conmigo, pero ya había cenado , I might understand he wanted 
to dine with me , but he had dined already , no? Because we have the same verb form, so how would 
we make that clearer?  
S: Just saying yo at some point.  
T: Exactly. But where? So give it to me again, and w e can say the word for he as well, especially 
when we are contrasting between two people, we will have the habit of putting who. So, he wanted 
to dine with me, but I had dined already :  
S: Él quería cenar conmigo pero yo ya había ... so dined , cenaría , no.  
T: No.  
S: Cenía .  
T: What you want to translate is not dined . You want to find the version after haber . This is going to 
save you a lot of pain.S: Cenado .  
T: Good. He wanted to have dinner with me but I had already had dinner . Él quería cenar conmigo 
pero yo ya había cenado . Now we don't need to look at or discuss when we use had as opposed 
to when we use have , when we use I had lost it as opposed to I have lost it , because it's exactly the 
same in Spanish as it is in English. So you will just translat e the thought, let's say. For example, 
you might want to say, he was looking for it because I had lost it . He was looking for it because I 
had lost it . To look for is buscar , buscar , to look for .  
S: Buscar .  
T: Good. Buscar , to look for . So, he was lookin g for it, he was searching for it :  
S: Buscía .  
T: Check the ending first.  
S: Buscaba .  
T: Good. He was looking for it :  
S: Lo buscaba.  
T: To lose  was?  
S: Perder .  
T: Because I had lost it :  
S: Porque yo lo había perdido.  
T: Good. Lo buscaba , or él lo buscaba, porque yo lo había perdido . Good. How would you say, I 
would have lost it - so not I had lost it, I would have lost it ?  
S: Lo habería perdido.  
T: Good. I would have lost it . Lo habría perdido . Now I'm not sure if you said habría  or “habería” 
because this irregularity that we have which is habría  happens so naturally because that e kind of 
falls out  so naturally. I think you said “habería”, but you kind of didn't pronounce the e well. Is 
that right?S: I meant to say “ habería ”.  
T: Yes. S o you see that naturally it's happening, that e of haber  is falling away, and that has been 
formalised in Spanish. You write it like this, h-a-b-r-i-a. Habría . Only with a few verbs, this 
contraction is occurring. Habría . Lo habría perdido . I would have lo st it. How would you say, I 
would have got lost , or I would have lost myself ?  
S: Me habría perdido.  
T: Good. Me habría perdido . Good.