Track 54  
T: Now, these versions of the verb  that we get after haber , and we said that it’s any version of haber , 
whether it’s he, whether it’s había , whether it’s habría , we could even say I will have. I will have 
lost it – lo habré perdido . Any version of haber  - we will have the -ado, -ido version after it, even 
if it’s in the “to” form – we could say something like I would like to have gone. I would like to 
have gone . I would like, it would please me :  
S: Me gustaría .    
T: To have gone.   
S: Haber ido .  
T: Me gustaría haber ido , it would please me to have gone, I would like to have gone , me gustaría 
haber ido . So, even after the “to” form we’re having just one version of the verb that can come 
after haber . Now, this version of the verb that can come after haber  is very useful, because, if it 
makes sense, we can use it as an adjective, just as we can in English. For example , in English we 
say: I have sold . And sold we can use like an adjective, we can say it is sold . We say I have lost . 
And we can use it like an adjective – I am lost . And you can do the same in Spanish, which gives 
you hundreds and hundreds of words  now that you can access as adjectives. So, for example, to 
close is cerrar . Cerrar .  
S: Cerrar .  
T: How would you say: I have closed it ? I have closed it :  
S: Lo he cerrado.   
T: Good. Lo he cerrado . You might be referring to the door , which is la puerta . So, if you were 
referring to the door , how would you say that? I have closed it :  
S: La he cerrado .  
T: Good. La he cerrado . Good. So cerrado  – we can take that and we can use it as an adjective. 
Now, it doesn’t change ever after haber  – it’s always cerrado: lo he cerrado, la he cerrado, lohemos cerrado . But, when it’s an adjective, when it’s behaving like an adjective, then of course, 
it can change. So, if you say it is closed and you mean the door , how would you say it?  
S: Cerrada .  
T: Good, so how wo uld you say that, it is closed ?  
S: Es cerrada .  
T: You think to be closed  is a state or a characteristic?  
S: Está cerrada.   
T: Está cerrada . In fact, the great majority, with just a couple of exceptions, of these adjectives that 
we get from -ado, -ido, that we get from the version that comes after haber , go with estar . With 
this particular type of adjective we don’t need to really think about whether it’s a state or a 
characteristic, they are just gonna go with estar , with a couple of exceptions. To los e was:  
S: Perder .  
T: What is the version that comes after haber , after any form of haber ? Perder  becomes:  
S: Perdido .  
T: Perdido . So, how would you say: I am lost ?  
S: Estoy perdido , or female, perdida .  
T: Good. Estoy perdido , or for feminine, perdi da. Good. What was to finish or to terminate ?    
S: Terminar .  
T: Terminar . How would you say: I have finished ?  
S: He terminado .  
T: Good. He terminado . So now you can also say it is finished,  and use it like an adjective.  
S: Está terminado.  
T: Good. Está terminado . What if you were referring to the movie , which is la película :  
S: Está terminada .T: Good. Está terminada . Good. So, this gives us a lot of adjectives we can access. Let’s have a look 
at some of them. To sell was vender , and then sold would be:  
S: Vendido .  
T: Good. They are sold :  
S: Están vendidos.  
T: Están vendidos . And if we mean las casas , how will it sound?  
S: Están vendidas.   
T: Good. Están vendidas . Good. Some of the adjectives that we already met are actually adjectives 
that we re formed in this way. How was the word for tired ?  
S: Cansado .  
T: Cansado . And this comes from the verb cansar , to tire . So cansar  is to tire , and then cansado  is 
the version that you get after haber , and it’s the adjective, cansado , tired. So, if you wa nt to say I 
get tired, I tire myself , so now it’s present:  
S: Me canso.  
T: Me canso . That means I get tired or even I get fed up . How would you say I have tired myself ? 
And like I said, it doesn’t literally mean that you are responsible for tiring yourself, it just means 
that you’ve got tired or you can use it like “I’ve had enough”. So, I have tired myself :  
S: He- Me he cansado.  
T: Good. Me he cansado . I’ve gotten tired, I’ve gotten fed up . Good. And then cansado  - which is 
the version of cansar  after haber  - is also, of course, the adjective tired . I am tired :  
S: Estoy cansada.  
T: Good. So, to close is cerrar , and we said that closed  is cerrado.  And we said that these –ado, -ido 
adjectives, with a couple of exceptions, go with estar . So, how  would you say it is closed ?  
S: Está cerrado.T: Good. How would you say he is closed to the idea - idea is the same word in Spanish. He is closed 
to the idea :  
S: Está cerrado a el idea?  
T: What gender does it look like: idea?  
S: La idea.  
T: Está c errado a la idea . He is closed to the idea . But if you want to say he is a closed person , you 
mean as a person he is closed , how do you think you would say it?  
S: Es un person cerrado?  
T: Almost. This is exactly the structure that we want, well done. But , the word for person  is feminine, 
it doesn’t refer to anybody specifically, just the word itself is feminine.  
S: Es una persona cerrado - cerrada.  
T: Good. Cerrada  refers to person . Very good. Es una persona cerrada . So that’s how we can get 
around that,  if we want to say he is closed and we mean he is a closed person . If we just say es 
cerrado  it sounds like a mistake. But es una persona cerrada is fine, because es is going with 
persona , what you are saying essentially is he is a person that is closed . Es una persona cerrada .  
How would you say she is lost ?  
S: Está perdida.  
T: Good. Está perdida , she is lost.  But if you want to say She is lost , you know, as a person, she’s 
lost her way :  
S: Es una persona perdida . Well, actually, why not está here?  
T: In this structure you are saying she is a person , you are not looking at lost person , you are looking 
at person . The adjective is totally secondary. So when you say this is a chair you are going to use 
ser. If you are going to say it’s a wet chair , even thought that is a state, you are still going to use 
ser. Because what you are saying is it’s a chair , the adjective is secondary. But, if you say it is 
wet, then you use estar.  So, chair  or seat is silla. Silla .  
S: Silla.T: Good. Mojar , mojar  means to wet . Mojar . Now, how do you think you say wet as an adjective?  
S: Mojada .  
T: Good. For silla, mojada . Feminine. Good. So, how would you say the chair,  la silla , the chair is 
wet?  
S: La silla está mojada.  
T: Good. La silla está mojada . But, if you say it is a wet chair , you are just saying it is a chair , and 
then an adjective is secondary, and the fact that it is a chair is about as characteristic as it gets.  
So, you are saying it is a chair :  
S: Es una silla.   
T: Wet:  
S: Mojada.   
T: Es una silla mojada . So, when we say something is a noun, when we give it its name, there’s 
nothing more characteristic. Es una persona , it is a person ; it is a happy person , es una persona 
feliz. It’s a chair , es una silla ; it’s a wet chair , es una silla mojada . The structure there is it is a 
chair , the adjective is secondary. But, when we say the chair is wet , then we are talking about a 
state of the chair with is: la silla está mojada . Good.