Track 55  
T: What was the to have , that we use to go in the past?  
S: Haber .  
T: Haber . Good. How would you say I have cancel led? I have cancel led:  
S: He cancelado.  
T: Good. He cancelado . And we said that the version of the verb that you get after haber  – you can 
use it like an adjective as well in Spanish, just as we d o in English. For example in English we 
could say it’s cance lled. We use the same version, cance lled, that comes after haber . So we can 
do the same in Spanish. So, how would you say it is cance lled, and I remind you that the adjectives 
that we form in this  way tend to go with estar , only with a few exceptions that are more flexible. 
So it is cancel led:  
S: Está cancelado.  
T: Está cancelado . What if we meant la fiesta , the party ?  
S: Está cancelada.  
T: Good. Está cancelada . Fiesta , by the way is actually  related to festival , festivity , we can see the e 
splitting between festival  and fiesta . To complicate  in Spanish, what’s complication ?  
S: Complicación , complicar .  
T: Complicar , “with folding”, complicar . Good. If you want to say it has got complicated , it has got 
complicated , how do you think you will say it?  
S: Se ha complicado.  
T: Good. Se ha complicado . It has got complicated . It has complicated itself , we would say. Very 
good. So, the adjective complicated  is:  
S: Complicado .  
T: Complicado . Good. So, you can say: It is complicated :S: Es complicado.  
T: Es complicado . Or?  
S: Está complicado.  
T: Está complicado . Actually, with this one you can use either; there tends to be a tendency to go 
with estar  with these types of adjectives, but wit h complicado  you could say either. Es 
complicado , está complicado , depending on what you were talking about, you might feel more 
drawn to one or to the other, but most of the time they are going to be interchangeable here. We 
can also make structures like should have , could have  with this haber . Let’s start with should have . 
Now should , we take it from the verb to owe , which also we use like must , and it’s related to 
English debt.  
S: Deber .  
T: Deber . Deber . Good. So, deber  is to owe  or must. And if you sa y would owe  you get should . So, 
how would you say I should ?  
S: Debería .  
T: Good. So now we can say I should have canceled , and this have  is to have . I should to have 
canceled :  
S: Debería haber cancelado.  
T: Very good. I should have canceled.  Debería haber cancelado . I should have canceled it :  
S: Lo debería haber cancelado.  
T: Very good. Lo debería haber cancelado . Where else could that lo go there?  
S: It’s after the unchanged verb, so debería haberlo cancelado .  
T: Yeah, debería haberlo cancelado . Very good. What was could ? So, we take to be able  and we 
say would be able  to get this could,  this could  that refers to future. So, what is to be able , related 
to power ?  
S: Poder .T: Poder . Good. So how would you say I would be able  or I could ?  
S: Podería .  
T: Okay,  
S: Podría .  
T: Podría . So, you could say something like I could have gone . I could have gone . What was to go ?  
S: Ir.  
T: Ir. And what was gone , the version of to go  after haber ?  
S: Ido.  
T: I could have gone :  
S: Podría hab er ido.  
T: Podría haber ido . We could have gone . We could have gone :  
S: Podríamos haber ido.  
T: Good. Podríamos haber ido . Good. So, after haber , any version of haber , whether it’s the “to” 
form, haber , whether it’s habría , any version of haber , it’s going to have –ado or –ido with the 
following verb. But some verbs are irregular and they don’t form their version after haber  in this 
way. So, to break , related to rupture  in English, was romper . Now, this after haber  is not 
“rompido”, “rompido” doesn’ t exist, it’s irregular, after haber  it’s roto: r-o-t-o, roto. So, how 
would you say I have broken it ?  
S: Lo he roto.  
T: Good. Lo he roto . I have broken them :  
S: Los he roto.  
T: Good. Los he roto . What if you want to say it has broken ? It has br oken :  
S: Se ha roto.T: Se ha roto . It has broken itself . It has broken . Very good. If you had just said ha roto  I would 
understand he, she, it or you (formal) has or have broken , and I would be waiting to hear what was 
broken. So, we have roto instead of “rompido”, let’s say . Roto  is the version of romper  after 
haber , which means it will also count for the adjective. So, if you want to say it is broken , how 
would you say it?  
S: Está roto.  
T: Está roto . And if it was a feminine thin g?  
S: Está rota.  
T: Está rota . To die is morir , morir .  
S: Morir .  
T: And the version after haber is not “morido”, it’s muerto , muerto . How would you say he has 
died?  
S: Ha muerto.  
T: Ha muerto . And with morir  you can hear it with se or without se, there is not really a lot of 
difference, sometimes the se doesn’t actually make a lot of difference - ha muerto, se ha muerto  
- you hear both. Now, if you want to say he is dead , how do you think you would say it?  
S: You mean as if it’s estar  or ser?  
T: W e know that this type of adjective tends to go with:  
S: Well, estar , but I could see why this specific one could also go with ser under certain 
circumstances.  
T: Yes, but it doesn’t, it never goes with ser. So, some of these adjectives we form in this wa y can go 
with ser, but this one can’t. So, firstly, how would that be, he is dead ?  
S: Está muerto.  
T: Está muerto . So, complicated , for example, could go with ser and estar , but muerto  can’t. Maybe 
it’s not just because they are this type of adje ctive, that dead  will go with estar , maybe it is about 
the way Spanish perceives the world . To be dead is a state, that the soul goes through, let’s say,you don’t know what is the perception behind that, or, if it’s just going with estar  because it’s  one 
of these adjectives. So, the y are interesting points to think about, and thinking about those points 
helps your memory, even if you are just looking out of interest and not coming to any conclusions. 
How would you say I’m dead  (and you can use thi s to mean tired) ? This is quite common in 
Spanish, if you are really tired, you can say oh, I’m dead.   
S: Estoy muerta.  
T: Yes, feminine. Estoy muerta . Good. You can say also I die myself  here, like morirse , in all 
different kinds of circumstances, when s omething’s really funny, when you can’t believe 
something, in many different circumstances you could use that, you will hear it around, but let’s 
build it, let’s see how it would sound. So, to die , morir , I die myself , making this reflexive 
structure, how would it sound?  
S: It’s irregular so the “mue” is going to come in. Muero , maybe? Muero ?  
T: Yes.  
S: Me muero.  
T: Me muero . Good. Me muero . So, you will hear this all the time actually in Spanish, ay, me 
muero , maybe from embarrassment, maybe from laugh ter, maybe from disbelief, it’s a common 
thing – me muero . To open in Spanish is abrir , abrir .  
S: Abrir .  
T: Abrir . And if you want to say I have opened it,  you say lo he abierto . So we don’t have “abrido” 
after haber , we have abierto . Another irregular o ne. Lo he abierto .  
S: Is it with an h?  
T: No, good question though, good that you are thinking about that. Abrir  is a-b-r-i-r. Abrir  becomes 
abierto . So, how would you say it is open ?  
S: Está abierto.  
T: Good. Está abierto . How would you say they are open ?  
S: Están abierto.T: Están ,  
S: Están abiertos.  
T: Good. Están abiertos . Decir  and hacer , to say or to tell , decir , and to make or to do,  hacer , also 
are irregular after haber . These two verbs are quite irregular in most places, we will pay them a 
little more attention later. So decir , to say or to tell , and hacer , to do and to make , are irregular 
after haber . Decir  becomes dicho , dicho , and hacer  becomes hecho ; which is why they are nice 
to see together, because they both have this / ch/ soun d. Decir  becomes dicho , and hacer  becomes 
hecho . So, how would you say I have said it ? I have said it :  
S: Lo he dicho.  
T: Good. Lo he dicho . And what if you wanted to say I have told him ?  
S: Lo he dicho .  
T: But what we want here is not him; what want here is to him . I have told to him :  
S: Le he dicho.  
T: Good. Le he dicho . Good. We have told him :  
S: Le hemos dicho.  
T: Good. Le hemos dicho . Good. Interestingly, dicho  is also a noun. We said that some version of 
the verb can form the noun; som etimes it’s the “to” form, sometimes it’s the “I” form, sometimes 
it’s the “he, she, it” form. Here it’s this form. Un dicho  is a saying, a saying . Hacer  after haber  
becomes hecho . So, how would you say I have done it  or I have made it ?  
S: Lo he hecho.  
T: Good. Lo he hecho . I should have done it . I should have done it . I should :  
S: Debería .  
T: I should have done it :  
S: Debería haberlo hecho?T: Yes! Debería haberlo hecho . Of course we can put the lo there because we have haber  in the “to” 
form. Debería  haberlo  hecho  or lo debería haber hecho . Very good. You should have done it  
(informally):  
S: Deberías haberlo hecho.  
T: Good. Deberías haberlo hecho . How would you say it is done ? It is done :  
S: Está hecho.  
T: Good. Está hecho . You might  also see this used like hecho en China , made in China , or hecho 
en España , made in Spain , you will see this on products, should be a nice reminder. So, hecho  as 
an adjective, made  or done , está hecho , it is done , it is made ; but, it can also be a noun: un hecho , 
un hecho  is a fact , and it’s actually connected to the word fact, even though they look so different. 
There is in Spanish and English what we can call a kind of grey area between h’s and f’s, because 
in a phonetic change that occurred in Spanish ma ny f’s became silent h’s, just as hecho  is from 
hacer , fact is from to do , so “faire”, like in French, if you know some French, is to do , and fact is 
related to “faire”, just as hecho  is related to hacer . And we can find some other connections 
between this  f and this silent h, between English and Spanish . For example in English we have 
fable , a fable is a story, and a story is spoken, and from there we see the relation with hablar . 
Fable , hablar . We have fugitive , which is the same root as huir, h-u-i-r, huir, which means to 
escape  or to run away  in Spanish. We have hermano  or hermana  in Spanish, brother or sister , 
spelled h-e-r-m-a-n-o, or with an a on the end for hermana , and there we see the connection with 
fraternal.  Hembra , which means female , h-e-m-b-r-a. Even within Spanish you can see this 
phenomenon of the h’s and the f’s. For example you have iron which is hierro , h-i-e-r-r-o, hierro , 
iron, and then you get ferrocarril , which means railways , so they look totally unrelated, but if you 
know that the f became the silent h and that the e split into ie you can see the connection between 
hierro  and ferrocarril . You have profundo , profundo , profound,  in Spanish, as you do in 
English, and then you have hondo , which means deep , so hondo  is the “fundo” bit of profundo , 
but with some changes, hondo , h-o-n-d-o to mean deep . Fumar  means to smoke . And then humo , 
h-u-m-o, is smoke , like a noun, el humo , the smoke . So there are some interesting things we can 
find between English and Spanish and within Spanish itself with these f’s and h’s. Also you can 
look out for some connections with other letters, you will find other pairs of letters like this, forexample w’s and g’s – you get war in English and guerra  in Spanish, William  in English and 
Guillermo  in Spanish . So this is an interesting thing to keep an eye out for to make connections 
between vocabulary and, of course, in this way aid your memory.