Track 56  
T: We’ve seen quite a few prepositions up until now, these words that refer to movement or position 
or direction. For example, we had two words for for, what were they?  
S: Para  and por.  
T: Good. Para  and por. And how did we say from  or of?  
S: De.  
T: De. With :  
S: Con.  
T: Con. In or on:  
S: En.  
T: En. Good, so we’ve seen quite a few of those. Now, prepositions in Spanish won’t come at the end 
of the sentence, as they can in English. We’ve seen this already as well. Do you remember how to 
say Where are you from? You are  (speaking informally) from ser is eres. Eres . So, how would 
you say Where are you from? :  
S: ¿De dónde eres ?  
T: ¿De dónde eres ? So, in English Where are you from?  We’re putting the preposition at the end of 
the sentence, and that’s fine in English, but it’s incorrect Spanish. So, you don’t say Where are 
you from? You say From where are you?  ¿De dónde eres?  If we want to say Where are you 
going? in Spanish , we say To where are you going?  What was You are going  (speaking 
informally )?  
S: Vas.  
T: Vas. Good, so, to where are you going? :  
S: ¿A dónde vas?T: ¿A dó nde vas ? Good. We are going to the United States . The United States is Estados Unidos , 
United States,  Estados Unidos , and I should mention, you don’t translate the word for the, you 
just say we are going to United States .  
S: Vamos a Estados Unidos .  
T: Vamos a Estados Unidos . We discussed the concept before about working backwards. So, instead 
of building up to say what we want to say, finding bits of language and working backwards to find 
the “to” form of the verb . So, for example, imagine we looked u p somewhere United States , or we 
asked somebody how to say United States , and we came across Estados Unidos . We can use 
Unidos  to work backwards to work out what is the verb to unite . How do you think that is?  
S: Unidar ?  
T: Not guessing, but really worki ng backwards, which, instead of building up, building down; instead 
of adding bits on to the verb, seeing what has been added and consciously taking it off.  
S: So, -ido has been added, when you add –ido you take off the ending of the “to” form.  
T: And wh at is the ending with –ido?  
S: -ir.  
T: Or?  
S: -er.  
T: You should experiment and see which one feels more natural to you. Now, the one that you may 
have heard before is probably going to feel more natural even if you didn’t register it, so if you 
heard before the correct version, it’s going to feel more natural, and also, the more words you learn 
in Spanish the greater intuition you get about the phonetics of Spanish, what sounds more Spanish. 
So, that should direct you when you say “Uner , Unir, Uner , Unir”, to understand which one is to 
unite . Which one do you think it is?  
S: Somehow I think that it’s unir.  
T: Unir . But, at this stage there is no reason for you to know what sounds more Spanish; this intuition 
is something that occurs with practice and exposure and listening. But working backwards is auseful skill that we want to employ in our language -learning journey. So, we said that prepositions 
won’t come at the end, so if we say, for example, the girl I work with , in Spanish we will say the 
girl with which, with that, with who, I work . We have the option. So what was to work , do you 
remember?  
S: Trabajo .  
T: To-  
S: Trabajar .  
T: Trabajar , to work . Good. The girl  is la chica , la chica , it’s kind of informal, but very common.  
La chica .  How do  you think the guy would be if the girl is la chica ?  
S: El chico ?  
T: El chico . So, we can begin with the one that we know already, which is with that , con que . The 
girl with that I work :  
S: La chica con que yo trabajo .  
T: La chica con que trabajo , you don’t need the yo unless you are emphasizing, la chica con que 
yo trabajo . We could also say with which , la chica con cual trabajo , we could say with who , la 
chica con quien trabajo . We could even put la que or la cual , which means which  or that, but 
we ar e showing that it’s a feminine which  or a feminine that, la chica con la cual trabajo , la chica 
con la que trabajo . You have all of those options in Spanish, but don’t worry about them, you 
can just use que. So, whilst you have all of those options and you  will hear them, and when you 
get comfortable with hearing them and understanding them you will start using the different ones 
without really thinking about it very much; you don’t want to worry about it now, que you can use 
for everything, for all of that . La chica con que trabajo .  
S: So, it’s correct?  
T: Yeah, it’s correct Spanish. But you have all of those options: la chica con cual trabajo; la chica 
con la cual trabajo, la chica con la que trabajo, la chica con quien trabajo . The girl that I was 
worki ng with . So, how would you say it is the girl I was working with ? Let’s go for it slowly.It is the girl :  
S: Es la chica.  
T: With who :  
S: Con que.  
T: Con que . I was working, I used to work :  
S: So, it’s trabajar , and that becomes –aba, trabaja ba.  
T: Good, all together, it’s the girl I was working with :  
S: Es la chica con que trabajaba.  
T: Es la chica con que trabajaba . How would you say the girl with whom, the girl that I was going 
to the party with. The girl with whom, or with that, with wh ich, all of those are okay in Spanish.  
S: La chica con que -  
T: La chica con que , I was going to the party . So, I was going is the line version of ir, which is 
irregular, but we can remember that it takes a little bit from the two options that we have to make 
the line version. We have –aba for –ar verbs and –ía for –er/-ir verbs; and the verb ir kind of 
blended together –aba and –ía and came up with:  
S: Iba.  
T: So, you can think of it that way: you can think of it like –aba and –ía kind of blending toget her, to 
have iba, or you can think of it like the present va, but with an i before. In the past it’s spelled with 
a b: i-b-a, iba, where in the present it’s spelled with a v, v-a, but as we know they are very similar 
sounding, so it’s like the present with  an i before. So, in the present you have he is goin g, él va , or 
él /ba/, and then in the past,  él iba . So I was going, he was going, she was going , it was going, you 
(formal ) were going is:  
S: Iba.  
T: Iba. So, the girl with which I was going to the pa rty:  
S: La chica con que iba a la fiesta.T: Good. La chica con que iba a la fiesta . So, you can say la chica con la cual , la chica con quien , 
la chica con la que – you have all of these options. Let’s use cual in a sentence, which is the word 
for which , and it’s not just a which  like this to connect the girl with which , you can also use it like 
a question: which one do you want?  You probably can guess, we don’t need the word for one.  
S: ¿Cuál quieres ?  
T: Good. Which one do you want ? ¿Cuál quieres ? Good . So cuál, cuál, c-u-a-l, means which . I know , 
from saber , to know , was sé; we said it’s very irregular, just s-e, I know .  
S: Sé.  
T: Good. How would you say I don’t know which one he wants ?  
S: No sé cual quiere.  
T: Good. No sé cual quiere . How would you say I don’t know which one he wants to see ?  
S: No sé cual quiere ver.  
T: No sé cual quiere ver . Good. Now, what if you wanted to say I don’t know with which one he 
wants to do it, I don’t know which one he wants to do it with :  
S: No sé con cual qu iere hacer - it with ?  
T: Well, you said the with already.  
S: Lo!  
T: Yeah.  
S: So, it’s just lo at the end?  
T: Yeah, and you might feel this temptation often to repeat the preposition again at the end, even if 
you put it before , because that English is p ushing through with the negative language transfer. No 
sé con cual quiere hacerlo , I don’t know with which one he wants to do it , I don’t know which 
one he wants to do it with . So, we don’t put the preposition at the end of the sentence in Spanish, 
we will  rearrange the sentence and whilst this sounds more formal in English, of course it doesn’t 
sound more formal in Spanish, it’s just the only correct option. The word for who, we’ve mentioned 
very briefly is quién , quién .S: Quién .  
T: Good. If you want to  say who is going?, what verb version will who go with? Who is who? Is it 
you, is it them , is it he/she/it ? Who is who?  
S: He/she/it.  
T: Good. So, how would you say who is going? :  
S: ¿Quién va?  
T: ¿Quién va ? Good. And in Spanish you have the plural of who, if you are expecting more than one 
person, if you know that your who refers to more than one person, you can put quien  into plural, 
so, how do you think that would sound?  
S: Quienes ?  
T: Yeah. Quienes . So if you want to say who is going?  And you know  it’s more than one person?  
S: ¿Quiénes van ?  
T: Good, and you changed the verb as well to match. ¿ Quiénes van ? Good. How would you say:  
Who is here? :  
S: ¿Quién es aquí ?  
T: You know -  
S: Está !  
T: Yes, it’s your location.  
S: ¿Quién está aquí ?  
T: Good . ¿Quién está aquí ? And if you knew you were talking about here, you could just leave that 
out as we have the sense of location with estar , we don’t really need to say the here, if we know 
that we are talking about here. Like we said before, if you knock o n someone’s door you just say 
¿Estás?  Because we are using estar , and we are talking about states, that’s enough context for us 
if we just leave it by itself to understand that we are speaking about location. So, you could just 
say who is?S: ¿Quién está?   
T: ¿Quién está ? I don’t know with who I have to do it. I don’t know who I have to do it with.  How is 
I have to , what have do we use to get the meaning of have to ?  
S: Tengo - tener .  
T: Tener . Tener , to have . I have :  
S: Tengo .  
T: Good, and to get the meaning of I have to :  
S: Tengo que.  
T: Tengo que . So, I don’t know who I have to do it with, I don’t know with who I have to do it :  
S: No sé con quien tengo que hacerlo.  
T: Good. No sé con quien tengo que hacerlo . Or if you knew we meant more than one person, no sé 
con quienes tengo que hacerlo . Good. How would you say I don’t know who I have to do it for, 
I don’t know for who I have to do it :  
S: No sé para quien tengo que hacerlo.   
T: Good. No sé para quien lo tengo que hacer  or no sé para quién tengo  que hacerlo . Good. What 
if you wanted to say I don’t know who I have to do it because of , I don’t know who I have to do it 
because of , so how would that sound?  
S: No sé por quien tengo que hacerlo.  
T: No sé por quien lo tengo que hacer, no sé por quien tengo que hacerlo.