Track 57  
T: What is to speak ?  
S: Hablar .  
T: Hablar . -ar verb, and to eat :  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . -er verb, and to live :  
S: Vivir .  
T: Vivir . -ir verb. Good, so there we have an –ar, -er and –ir verb, and we saw –ar verbs form one 
group, and –er/-ir verbs form another group. But, we have one time in the entire Spanish language, 
where there is a difference between –er and –ir verbs, otherwise they are always forming one 
group. But just one occasion in the whole Spanish language, where t here is a difference between 
them. How do you say we speak or we are speaking ?  
S: Hablamos .  
T: Hablamos . How would you say we eat or we are eating ?  
S: Comemos .  
T: Comemos . Good, and how is we live ?  
S: Vivimos .  
T: Vivimos . Good. So, for -er verbs we u se -emos  for we in the present, and for -ir verbs we use -imos  
for we in the present. But of course for the other versions they are using the same endings, for 
example, he eats  is:  
S: Come .  
T: Come . We use / e/. He lives:  
S: Vive .  
T: Vive . Again we are using an e. They eat , or you guys eat :S: Comen .  
T: Good. They live or you guys live :  
S: Viven .  
T: Viven . Where do you guys live? :  
S: ¿Dónde viven?  
T: ¿Dónde viven ? Very good. What was the word for it? Not eat, but it, i-t:  
S: Lo.  
T: Lo. Good. Ther e’s a couple of interesting and useful things we can do with lo, it, in Spanish, which 
we can’t do in English. For example, when you want to say the interesting thing, the complicated 
thing is , the interesting thing is , the difficult thing about that is , instead of saying the word for 
thing , in Spanish you can just say, for example, lo interesante . Lo interesante means the 
interesting thing . So, you get the structure the interesting thing with lo interesante . So, how would 
you say, for example, the int eresting thing is that they live here ? The interesting thing is that they 
live here :  
S: Lo interesante es que viven aquí.  
T: Very good. Lo interesante es que viven aquí . Very good. How would you say the interesting 
thing is that they live together ? Now, the word for together  in Spanish is junto , junto .  
S: Junto .  
T: This is the singular masculine version. J-u-n-t-o. Now, it’s related to junction , it doesn’t sound like 
it, but when you realize that junto  is with j, then you can see how it’s related to junction  in English 
and join. The interesting thing is that they live together :  
S: Lo interesante es que viven junto?  
T: Good, but it’s them, no? They , viven :  
S: Juntos .  
T: Good. Lo interesante es que viven juntos . Or, if they were two females, you would  say:S: Juntas .  
T: Good. Lo interesante es que viven juntas . The interesting thing is that they live together.  What 
do you think fácil means? Fácil :  
S: Easy .  
T: Easy . Why?  
S: Facilitate .  
T: Facilitate . Good. To facilitate  is to make easy , so, we h ave fácil, easy. So, if you wanted to say the 
easy thing , how would you say that?  
S: Lo fácil.  
T: Lo fácil , and then you will carry on, so we can say the easy thing is that they come together . The 
easy thing is that they come together :  
S: Lo fácil  es que , venir  is irregular, right?  
T: Try and build it, see what happens, go there first and then see.  
S: It’s not “vieno”, no it’s vengo .  
T: But you are going for the “they” version, so don’t go from venir  to “I” version to “they” version . 
S: But I might as well remember it.  
T: Why? That’s how you get lost, right? What you want to do is focus your thoughts on just what you 
have in front of you, which is going from venir  to the “they” form, and try to build it as it should 
be, and then when you get that result, then have a look at maybe if it’s irregular, if it doesn’t feel 
right  -  
S: So, is it vienen ?  
T: Of course! You see?  
S: Yeah. The “I” one though! My mind is trying to remember.T: Vengo . But it’s not important, if you don’t need it now it shouldn’t be important for you, because 
with everything you will remember, you will remember something similar that you don’t 
remember . If you let that occupy your thoughts then you are gonna block. You need to be 
comfortable with a level of unce rtainty to learn a language. If you want to have the whole panorama 
of the whole language before you start speaking, you will never start speaking. And sooner or later 
we are gonna come across again that thought that distracted us cause we are gonna want t o say it, 
and in that moment we will sort it out. So, the more we do that, the more you are gonna control 
this panorama of Spanish, that makes you a little bit insecure right now, because you know so 
much and you feel like it’s all floating around.  The easy thing is that they come together :  
S: Lo fácil es que vienen juntos.  
T: Good. Lo fácil es que vienen juntos . Very good. How would you say the complicated thing is 
that they come together :  
S: Complicación  – complicar  – complicado ?  
T: Yeah.  
S: So, lo complicado es que vienen juntos .  
T: Lo complicado es que vienen juntos . Good. So we can say lo bueno , the good thing ; lo malo , 
the bad thing . Malo is bad, like in malnutritioned , that means badly  nutritioned , so that’s a useful 
structure. Before we  said de esta forma , in this way , de esta forma . We could also say de esta 
manera , in this manner , but very very common in Spanish when we want to say like this , like that , 
is the word así, a-s-i, así.  
S: Así.  
T:  Así means like this or like that . So, if you want to say something like we don’t speak like this, we 
don’t speak in that way , you don’t really need to say de esa manera or de esa forma , you can just 
take this wonderful shortcut for  like this or like that , which is así. So, like this , like th at, así.  
So, we don’t speak like that , we don’t speak in that way :  
S: No hablamos así.  
T: No hablamos así . We don’t eat like that :S: No comemos así.  
T: No comemos así . We don’t live like that :  
S: No vivimos así.  
T: No vivimos así . Good. Another int eresting thing that we can do with lo, a useful structure we can 
make with lo, is lo de . The combination of lo and de means like the thing about . So we see how 
lo can sometimes replace  thing , lo interesante , the interesting thing , and lo de is like the thi ng 
about . So, for example, if you wanted to say the thing about the party , you just say lo de la fiesta . 
So if you want to say we are speaking about the thing about the party - not we are speaking about 
the party , but we are speaking about that issue of th e party, that thing we know what we are 
referring to , we are speaking about that business about the party,  hablamos lo de la fiesta . Or 
hablamos sobre , about , you could say that as well, hablamos sobre lo de la fiesta . You can even 
say de, we speak of , hab lamos de lo de la fiesta . You can say that business about Juan, that thing 
about Juan , how would you say that?  
S: Lo de Juan.  
T: Lo de Juan . Good. So, you could say I don’t want to speak about Juan’s business like this,  I don’t 
want to speak about Juan’s  business like this . And for Juan’s business you will just say:  
S: Lo de Juan.  
T: Good. So, I don’t want to speak about Juan’s business like this :  
S: No quiero hablar de lo de Juan así.  
T: Good. No quiero hablar de lo de Juan así . Or we could say no qu iero hablar sobre lo de Juan 
así, or just no quiero hablar lo de Juan así . So, lo de we kinda wanna see as a unit, meaning that 
thing about . And we’ve seen already that de can mean about , so it’s just it about , that thing about . 
It’s used very often in Spa nish and you will find it very useful. So, you could say, for example, I 
want to organize that thing tomorrow. That thing tomorrow, that thing about tomorrow . I want to 
organize , what’s to organize ?  
S: Organizar .  
T: Good. So, I want to organize that thin g about tomorrow :S: Quiero organizar lo de la mañana ?  
T: La mañana  is the morning .  
S: Oh, sorry, tomorrow .  
T: Yes, so morning  and tomorrow  are the same word in Spanish, mañana . If you say la mañana we 
are going to understand the morning .  
S: So it’s j ust mañana .  
T: Good, so all together:  
S: Quiero organizar lo de mañana.  
T: Very good. Quiero organizar lo de mañana . It about tomorrow, the thing about tomorrow . 
Quiero organizar lo de mañana . But I don’t want to organize it like this , but I don’t want to 
organize it like this :  
S: Pero no quiero organizarlo así.  
T: Good. Pero no quiero organizarlo así.  Good. But I don't want to organize it like this . Or, if you 
wanted to be more emphatic, you could replace así with de esta manera , de esta forma , of thi s 
way, of this form , but así is the most common, you will be hearing it all the time.