Track 58  
T: We have one more time in Spanish to learn, one more verb time, and that’s the point in the past. 
The one that usually we would express with -ed in English: wanted , walked , or, you know, the 
irregular versions: ran, ate. This is the point in the past and it’s much more random than the other 
tenses that we looked at. The point in the past is a little bit more messy, but we will find some 
logic in it, just not t he same one that we’ve been seeing until now. So, we will practice with hablar  
for –ar verbs and with comer  for –er/-ir verbs, and we will use these verbs as our hooks that we 
can look back to when we need to remember one of these endings. So, I spoke , I spoke , is hablé , 
hablé .  
S: Hablé .  
T: Can you tell me what I did there then to get I spoke from to speak , from hablar ?  
S: You took off the –ar ending and added an /e/.  
T: Good. Anything else?  
S: Well, the accent  is on the / e/.  
T: Perfect. Hablé . Good.  So, that’s I spoke . And he/she/it or you (formal) spoke  is habló , habló .  
S: Habló .  
T: Good. And what did I do there to get habló  from hablar ?  
S: You took off the –ar and you put an o.  
T: Okay, and  what else ?  
S: The accent is on the o.  
T: Good. So, r emember when we said how important the accent was in the present, because if you 
stress HA-blo, I speak , if you stress it wrong we said that we will get this version in the past, 
ha-BLÓ ,  he/she/it  and you (formal) spoke . What was I didn’t speak :  
S: No habló . 
T: IS: Ah, sorry, no hablé .  
T: No hablé . And that might happen to you often, because we have such strong connection between 
/o/ and I, but in this point in the past it’s / e/. No hablé . And he didn’t speak or she didn’t speak or 
you (formal) didn’t speak :  
S: No habló.  
T: No habló . Good. What was to buy ?  
S: Comprir, comprar .  
T: Good, comprar . So if you come up with “comprir”, for example, and it doesn’t feel right, you can 
just run a little check and change the ending: “comprir”, “comprer ”, comprar , and the one that 
you heard before is going to be the one that jumps out at you: comprar . So, how would you say I 
bought ?  
S: Compré .  
T: Compré . And I bought it :  
S: Lo compré .  
T: Lo compré . I didn’t buy it :  
S: No lo compré .  
T: Good. No lo compré . He bought it :  
S: Lo compró .  
T: Lo compró . He bought it for me :  
S: Me lo compró .  
T: Good, we don’t need the for. Very good. Me lo compró . We could use the for, if we wanted, if we 
wanted to emphasize or stress that it’s for me , so, how woul d that be?  
S: Lo compró para mi .  
T: Good. Lo compró para mi . To send in Spanish is enviar .S: Enviar .  
T: So we have envoy  from this in English.  
S: Envelope .  
T: Is that from there?  
S: Must be -  
T: Or is it from envelop , like to encapsulate , you hav e encapsulate , envelop . But, like I said we don’t 
need to know when we consider these things, just considering it helps us remember that word and 
if you are particularly curious there are, I mean, to check, there are some very good online free 
resources, f or example, etymonline.com, is an excellent free etymological dictionary, where you 
can check any word you have a curiosity for. So enviar , to send . I sent :  
S: Envié .  
T: Exactly. I sent it :  
S: Lo envié .  
T: I sent it to you , speaking informally:  
S: Te lo envié.  
T: Good. I didn’t send it to you :  
S: No te lo envié.  
T: Good. No te lo envié . The word for still or yet, the same word in Spanish, still or yet, is todavía , 
todavía .  
S: Todavía .  
T: Which is actually the combination of todo , here toda , in feminine, meaning all, and vía, like via 
in English, is a way, so it’s “all the way”. But of course no Spanish speaker hears that, when they 
hear todavía , just like when we say expressions like as well , we don’t think that that’s built of as 
and well. So, the words, sometimes the small words we build these bigger words out of in English 
and in Spanish, don’t make much sense to us most of the time, but for a learner it’s useful for youto divide a word like todavía , because it’s long and you might find it difficult to remember, and if 
you identify that it’s toda  and vía, even if that doesn’t really make any sense with the meaning of 
yet and still, it’s gonna help you internalize that vocabulary. So, yet or still:  
S: Todavía .  
T: Todavía . I didn’t  send it to you yet , still speaking informally:  
S: No te lo envié todavía .  
T: Good. No te lo envié todavía . Good. What was he sent  or she sent  or you (formal) sent, it sent ?  
S: Envió .  
T: Good. Envió . Yesterday , the word for yesterday  was ayer, a-y-e-r.  
S: Ayer .  
T: Good. So, how would you say he sent it yesterday ?  
S: Lo envió ayer .  
T: Good. Lo envió ayer . He sent it yesterday, she sent it yesterday, you (formal) sent it yesterday . If 
you want to say it was sent yesterday , this kind of st ructure in English where we don’t say who 
did it, we just say it was sent yesterday , how do you think you might say that in Spanish?  
S: Se lo envié , no-  
T: Think first, the structure in English, what you will say in Spanish, but in English.  
S: It sent itself.   
T: Exactly. It sent itself. So what is it sent ?  
S: Envió .  
T: Okay, It sent itself :  
S: Se envió .  
T: Yes, and you are dying to put the lo there, right?  
S: Yes!T: So, this is the intuition because you have it sent in your mind, but  if you don’t succumb to that 
intuition and you work mechanically it sent , envió , it sent itself , se envió , okay, then you don’t get 
lo, because you don’t need it. So, it sent itself yesterday, it was sent yesterday:   
S: Se envió ayer .  
T: Good. Se envió a yer. Good. Again, what was to speak ?  
S: Hablar .  
T: Good, and I spoke :  
S: Hablé .  
T: Good, and he spoke :  
S: Habló .  
T: He spoke with me :  
S: Habló conmigo .  
T: Good. Habló conmigo . I don’t know why he didn’t speak with me . I don’t know why he didn’t  
speak with me.  So, the first bit is I don’t know why :  
S: No sé por qué .  
T: He didn’t speak with me :  
S: No habló conmigo .  
T: Good. No sé por qué no habló conmigo . To forget  is olvidar , olvidar.   
S: Olvidar .  
T: That means to forget.  And the noun, olvid o, we don’t have it in English, I don’t think . The 
forgetting , el olvido , the process , like the experience of forgetting, I don’t think we have a word 
like this in English, and you will hear it a lot in songs especially in Spanish, especially tango, if 
you listen to tangos, they speak about falling in love and forgetting, not ever falling out of love, 
only el olvido . Olvidar,  to forget . How would you say I forgot ?S: Olvidé .  
T: And he forgot :  
S: Olvidó .  
T: I was going to do it, but I forgot it . I was going to do it, but I forgot it . So, the first bit is I was 
going , this is your line in the past, and it’s one of the three irregular verbs that we have in the line 
of the past.  
S: Iba.  
T: Iba. So, I was going to do it :  
S: Lo iba a hacer.  
T: But I forgot it :  
S: Pero lo olvidé.  
T: Good. Lo iba a hacer pero lo olvidé . Good.