Track 59  
T: So, for –ar verbs we have / e/ for I: hablar  - to speak , hablé  – I spoke , and / o/ for he/she/it/you 
formal and we are accenting our endings - hablé , habló . For –er/-ir verbs we have an / i/ sound, so 
an i, an i, for I, and / ió/, i-o, for he/she/it . So we have / i/ and / ió/. So, if you go to comer  – to eat , 
I ate is comí , and he ate/she ate/it ate/you (formal) ate is comió . We are accenting the endings 
again, the i and the o. Comí , comió .  
S: Comí , comió .  
T: Good. What was salir ? Salir :  
S: To leave ?  
T: To leave or to go out . So, how would you say I went out or I left?  
S: Salí.  
T: Salí. She went out, she left :  
S: Salió .  
T: Salió . Good. She didn’t go out y et, she didn’t leave yet :  
S: No salió todavía .  
T: Good. No salió todavía . I don’t know why she didn’t leave yet.  I don’t know why she didn’t leave 
yet:  
S: No sé por qué no salió todavía .  
T: Good. No sé por qué no salió todavía . What did qué mean? Qué, what does that mean?  
S: What .  
T: Yes, what , and what else does it mean?  
S: That.T: That. In, like, I hope that , espero que , good. So, apart from what  and that, que also means than, 
than. So, you can use it like this, so you could say, for example, I ate more than him. I ate is the 
first bit:  
S: Comé ?  
T: -er/-ir verb.  
S: Comí .  
T: Good. I ate more than him :  
S: Comí más que él .  
T: Good. Not him, than he . More than he ate . Comí más que él – I ate more than him , or more than 
he ate . Good. He ate mor e than me :  
S: Comió más que  … and I’m not sure if it’s “mi” or “migo”.  
T: When we said comí más que él , we put él there because whilst in English we say him, what we 
really mean is he. I ate more than he ate . It’s quite peculiar in English, that we say him and not he, 
so in Spanish we are being more literal: comí más que él – I ate more than he . So, he ate more 
than me - Comió más que :  
S: Yo.  
T: Exactly. So, he ate more than I, he ate more than I ate.  So, how would that be?  
S: Comió más que yo .  
T: Goo d. Comió más que yo . It’s actually quite peculiar in English that we say me. In fact, the way 
we use words like me instead of I is really peculiar in English, and it’s a negative language transfer, 
that could influence other languages that you are learning . For example, if I say who wants to go 
to the park , you might say me! This doesn’t make any sense. It’s I, I want to go to the park , what 
is this me? So, there is some strange use of these words in English that might influence our Spanish, 
so we need to c ut that negative language transfer when we identify it popping up. So, comió más 
que yo , he ate more than I, he ate more than I ate . What was to see ?  
S: Ver.T: Ver. Good. I saw ? Ver is regular here, so I saw . So, go back to comer,  use that as your hoo k.  
S: Vi.  
T: Good. I saw him :  
S: Lo vi.  
T: Good . Lo vi. I didn’t see him :  
S: No lo vi.  
T: No lo vi. I saw him, but he didn’t see me.  And, as we are contrasting we will probably use one or 
both of the words for I and he, those words we don’t  need to use, we will probably use one or both 
of them here as we’re contrasting, although you don’t need to, so it’s up to you. I saw him, but he 
didn’t see me . First bit is I saw him :  
S: Lo vi.  
T: But, he didn’t see me :  
S: Pero no me vio.  
T: Goo d. Lo vi, pero no me vio. And like I said, as we are contrasting we might feel an urge to say 
the word for él: lo vi, pero él no me vio or yo lo vi, pero él no me vio, depends on the context, 
even if you have context and you know who you ar e talking about , you might feel yourself wanting 
to say these words because you are contrasting. The word for nothing, nothing,  in Spanish is nada , 
nada .  
S: Nada .  
T: N-a-d-a, nada .  
S: Nada .  
T: And we have double negative in Spanish, which means you ca n say I didn’t see nothing :  
S: No vi nada .  
T: Good. No vi nada . I didn’t eat anything :S: No comí nada .  
T: No comí nada . Didn’t you eat anything  (speaking formally) ? Didn’t you eat anything? :  
S: ¿No comió nada ?  
T: ¿No comió nada ? Why didn’t yo u eat anything? :  
S: ¿Por qué no comió nada ?  
T: ¿Por qué no comió nada ? Good. The word for nobody  is nadie .  
S: Nadie .  
T: N-a-d-i-e, nadie .  
S: Nadie .  
T: Nobody saw anything, nobody saw nothing :  
S: Nadie vio nada .  
T: Good.  Nadie vio nada . Goo d. Nobody saw anything . Durar , durar, means to last . Durar.   
S: Durar .  
T: We have endure  in English.  
S: Duration ?  
T: Duration , and you even get like corporate names, that use these Latin roots and kind of appeal to 
your understanding without you realizi ng that you understand it. So, for example, you have 
Duracell  batteries, you know what that means, but you don’t know why you know what it means, 
so you can identify this kind of use of Latin in industry and how it’s appealing to your subconscious 
understa nding of the message that they want to give you about the products. So, look out for that. 
So, durar , to last . Minute  in Spanish is minuto . So, how would you say it lasted two minutes ? It 
lasted two minutes :  
S: Duró dos minutos .  
T: Very good. Duró d os minutos . I lasted two minutes :S: Duré dos minutos .  
T: Good. Duré dos minutos . We looked at before how you can get this -ing adjective. So, the 
adjective that we have for -ing, like interesting , using -ante or -iente . So, interesting  was 
interesante . So, during  is not an adjective, but it’s formed in the same way, so how do you think 
you say during  in Spanish?  
S: Durante ?  
T: Yes, durante . So you could say during two minutes:   
S: Durante dos minutos .  
T: Good. And you can use that like for, as well. S o, we said that with time you can say por dos 
minutos , but you can also say durante,  you will hear that as well in Spanish, durante dos 
minutos , during two minutes, for two minutes . What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . Good. And he ate :  
S: Comió .  
T: Comió . How would you say he ate for half  an hour , or he ate during half an hour - half an hour 
is media , half, and what was hour ?  
S: Hora .  
T: Hora , like in ahora . Media hora . Good. So, he ate during half an hour, he ate for half an hour :  
S: Comió dura nte media hora .  
T: Good. Comió durante media hora . He spoke during half  an hour, for half an hour :  
S: Habló durante media hora .  
T: Habló durante media hora . What was with in Spanish?  
S: Con.  
T: Con. Without  in Spanish is sin. S-i-n, sin.S: Sin.  
T: Sin. And to stop, to stop, is parar , parar . P-a-r-a-r, parar .  
S: Parar .  
T: So you could say he spoke for half an hour without stopping . He spoke for half an hour without 
stopping :  
S: Habló durante media hora sin parar .  
T: Good. Habló durante m edia hora sin parar . And we said that after prepositions, so sin is a 
preposition, we are not saying stoppING , we are saying to stop – sin parar , “without to stop”. 
Habló durante media hora sin parar . Parar  is interesting, because par, par, in Spanish mean s 
pair,  so un par is a pair . So, like a pair of shoes , un par de zapatos , un par de zapatos . So, 
parar , to stop , might be “the pairing”, you can imagine this kind of time and space notion of two 
things pairing, reaching each other and then stopping. And th en comparar , to compare,  is “with 
pairing”. So, even though this is an m here, it’s con, the n has been softened by that p, which is 
why we say compare . So, “with pairing” is to compare . Prepare , of course, is “pre -pairing”, we 
can see this in English as well. Repair,  to repair is to “re -pair”, to pair up again. Separar  is to 
separate in Spanish, separation , separación , separar ; and this se- means apart , so to separate is 
to “pair apart”, to “pair apart ”.