Track 6  
T: What do you think intento might mean? Quiero  is I want , and this -o is showing that it’s I. If you 
heard intento , what do you think it might mean?  
S: Try?  
T: Yeah. How did you know that? Do you know how you knew that?  
S: Yeah. I sort of went from intend , I intend to do some thing .  
T: There is no rule here to convert intention  to a verb. It’s not –ation  so we can’t take off the –ation  
and put –r.  
S: Yeah.  
T: But we have intention , we know what is the meaning so we can hear a verb like this and understand 
what it means. Intento means I try or I am trying. I try or I am trying . So how would you say I am 
trying to publish it ? Again it’s something you think “I can’t say this in Spanish!”  
S: Intento publicarlo.   
T: Good. Intento publicarlo.  I try to publish it or I am tryi ng to publish it . We’ve got both there.  
Good. How would you say I am trying to administrate it ?  
S: Intento administrarlo.   
T: Good . Intento administrarlo.  I am trying to imitate it  or I am trying to imitate him . It could mean 
either.  
S: Inten to, OK, it’s imitation -imitación -imitar . Intento imitarlo .  
T: Exactly. Now h's in Spanish are completely silent. You must be careful not even to think  them 
because they will have a habit of slipping out even if you think it. So it’s written, the h is writ ten 
in convertible words for example, like hospital  (ends in –al) but it’s not pronounced. You must 
imagine that it begins with an o. So how would you say hospital ?  
S: Hospital.T: See? You thought of the h and a little kind of aspiration came there, w hich is fine, but to get the 
perfect accent you really want to think in your mind that it begins with o.  
S: Hospital.   
T: There you are perfect. Hospital.  Horrible :  
S: Horrible.   
T: Good. And here we have an example of double r inside the word. Horrible , horrible . If you can’t 
pronounce that you just make horrible  and it will be perfectly understood: there is no problem 
there. Good. How would you say habitual ?  
S: Habitual .  
T: Habitual . Habitually:   
S: Habitualmente.   
T: Habitualmente.  The word for now in Spanish is ahora .  
S: Ahora.   
T: This is spelled a-h-o-r-a. A-h-o-r-a. Ahora.   
S: Ahora.   
T: Good.  
S: Is the h silent in every…  
T: Yeah. Unless it’s c-h in which case it’s like English /ch/. Ahora  is actually the combination of two 
words: a which mean s to and hora  which means hour . So it’s something like “to the hour”. So that 
gives us another couple of words as well, a meaning to in the sense of direction, to somewhere, 
and hora  meaning hour . Ahora , now. So how would you say I want to cancel it , but I don’t want 
to cancel it now ? We said that the word for but is pero . So we want to divide it up piece by piece. 
I want:   
S: Quiero.   
T: To cancel it:S: Cancelarlo.   
T: Good. But:  
S: Pero.   
T: I don’t want:   
S: No quiero.   
T: To cancel it:   
S: Cancelarl o.  
T: Now:   
S: Ahora.   
T: Perfect! So a big sentence which we might imagine that we can’t take on ; if we divide it up bit by 
bit we realise that we can think our way through it. The word for I go or I am going  in Spanish is 
voy. S: Voy.   
T: Voy.   
S: Voy.   
T: Good. Now this is actually spelled v-o-y. Now the v in Spanish can sound like a v in English like a 
/v/ or it can sound like a soft b like /boy/. You might be familiar with the word vamos  which means 
let’s go , literally we are going , used a lot like let’s go , vamos . Now this is spelled v-a-m-o-s. What 
you probably hear there is a b. It really depends where you are: in the southern cone around 
Argentina and Chile you hear a lot more /v/  kind of pronunciation in many places. Generally in 
the Spanish -speaking world i t’s like a soft b so we want to make that association now between v 
and soft b. To remember this word, voy, we can think of a voyage so we can see the connection 
there between voyage  and to go . I go or I am going ?  
S: Voy.   
T: I am going now:   
S: Voy ahora.T: Voy ahora . I am not going now:   
S: No voy ahora.   
T: Good, No voy ahora.  How do you think you might say visit in Spanish?  
S: Visitar ?  
T: Yeah. Why did you think that? Was it just a guess?  
S: Well, it’s visitation …  
T: Visitation , does that exist?  
S: I think so, visitation rights?  
T: Exactly! Very good! This is it. It’s a word that exists that we only use in some context, like 
visitation rights. Visitar , visitar , if you are not comfortable with the soft b just pronounce a v, it 
doesn’t matter. When you practice Spanish you are going to pick up the accent of who you are 
speaking to so it’s not a fundamental issue of ours right now. So, visitar . I want to visit him:   
S: Quiero visitarlo.   
T: Good. We can look at some other words now wi th this v sound and experiment a little bit with the 
sound. So how do you think you would say visible  in Spanish?  
S: Visible.   
T: Good. There is something very good that you are doing here, you are not pronouncing that s as a z 
like in English: visible . Many people at home will find themselves doing this, putting that z there 
from English and pronouncing vi-zi-ble. We don’t want that, we want visible . And the v is like a 
soft b. If you want more elaboration of what is this soft  b you can put a small piece of paper in 
front of your mouth and make the b in English like bucket  and you will see that paper move with 
that burst of air that comes with bucket . That hard b in English is a plosive sound, it means you 
gather up a little bit of air and you shoot it out when you make that b, where this b doesn’t have 
that, it's a soft one. So you can experiment with that, again like I say we don’t want to stress out 
about sounds, to use a v sound is perfectly fine. Viral:   
S: Viral.T: Viral . Good. So if viral  is viral  how do you think virus  might be?  
S: Viro .  
T: Virus.  It’s actually the same word, you are just pronouncing it exactly as it is. Virus.   
Convenient:   
S: Conveniente ?  
T: Conveniente.  Good.