Track 60  
T: What was to speak  in Spanish?  
S: Hablar .  
T: Hablar . I spoke :  
S: Hablé .  
T: Hablé . And he spoke/she spoke/you  (formal) spoke :  
S: Habló .  
T: Habló . Good. We spoke  is hablamos,  which, I’m sure you’ve noticed, is exactly the same as the 
present, we speak . So, hablamos  means we speak or we spoke , which, for one side  is wonderful 
because it means you get another version of this very irregular tense without having to remember 
a new one. But, of course, it can cause some ambiguity, and in real life it can cause some ambiguity, 
not often, mind, because most of the time you have some context showing that you are talking 
about the past. For example, the word for when  is cuando.   
S: Cuando .  
T: So, if you want to say when we speak  I understand everything,  what was to understand ?  
S: Comprender .  
T: Comprender . So, when we speak, I understand everything :  
S: Cuando hablamos, comprendo todo .  
T: Good. Cuando hablamos, comprendo todo . So, cuando hablamos , that bit could be when we 
speak , generally , or when we spoke , so that second half brings us into the context and we 
understand that when we speak , generally speaking, I understand everything. Cuando hablamos, 
comprendo todo . But, if you wanted to say when we spoke I understood everything , then, of 
course, the first bit is going to be the same, but tha t second bit, I understood everything , is going 
to give you that context. So, let’s practice that one - when we spoke I understood everything :  
S: Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo .T: Very good. Cuando hablamos, comprendí todo . So again, the second part of  that sentence is 
making it clear whether this hablamos  is the present or the past. Cuando hablamos, comprendo 
todo; cuando hablamos, comprendí todo . We spoke yesterday.  We spoke yesterday :  
S: Hablamos ayer.   
T: Hablamos ayer . Good. And we know that we ca n use the present with future context in Spanish.  
So, if you wanted to say we will speak tomorrow :  
S: Hablamos mañana .  
T: Hablamos mañana . So, hablamos ayer , we spoke yesterday ; hablamos mañana , we will speak 
tomorrow . How would you say we wait a lot , we wait a lot , generally ? What is a lot in Spanish?  
S: Mucho .  
T: Good. To wait or to hope :  
S: Esperar .  
T: Esperar . If you forget this one you can think of desperate,  which means “un -hoped”. Desesperado  
in Spanish, again one of these -ado/-ido adjectives from the version that comes after haber.  You 
can see desesperar  – desesperado,  which made desperate.  And it’s desesperado  in Spanish, not 
“desperado”, like we have some spanishisms, let’s say, that have entered English, but they can 
enter incorrect ly, like “desperado” is desesperado  in Spanish; or in English you might hear “no 
problemo”, this is loosely based on Spanish, but of course, problem  in Spanish is problema,  not 
“problemo”, and actually you would say ningun problema , not “no problema”. So, esperar , to 
wait or to hope . So, talking generally, we wait a lot, we wait around a lot :  
S: Esperamos mucho .  
T: Esperamos mucho . Maybe you meant yesterday, here it might be ambiguous, unless the context 
is clear. So, if you want to clarify, you might wan t to say the word yesterday.  How would you say 
we waited a lot yesterday ?  
S: Esperamos mucho ayer .  
T: Good. Esperamos mucho ayer . What was to eat ?S: Comer .  
T: Comer . And what is we eat ?  
S: Comemos .  
T: Comemos . We ate is comimos , comimos . We at e:  
S: Comimos .  
T: We didn’t eat :  
S: No comimos .  
T: No comimos . What was to live ?  
S: Vivir .  
T: And we live  (generally):  
S: Vivimos .  
T: And we lived :  
S: Vivimos .  
T: Vivimos . So, what this means is that because of this one difference we have in th e entire language 
between -er and -ir verbs, in the present we have -emos for -er and -imos for -ir, what that means 
is that when we go into the past, -ir verbs stay the same, vivimos -vivimos,  but –er verbs are 
different: comemos -comimos.  So, what was to see?  
S: Ver.  
T: And we see , in the present?  
S: Vemos .  
T: Vemos . And we saw :  
S: Vimos .  
T: Vimos . Good. What was to go out or to leave ?S: Salir .  
T: Good. We are going out , or we are leaving :  
S: Salimos .  
T: Good. And we went out or we left :  
S: Salimos .  
T: The same. What was to lose ?  
S: Perder .  
T: Perder . We lose :  
S: Perdemos .  
T: Good. We lost :  
S: Perdimos .  
T: Good. How would you say we got lost or we lost ourselves ?  
S: Nos perdimos .  
T: Nos perdimos . Good. Okay, so how would you say we always get lost, but we didn’t get lost 
yesterday ? First thing - what was the word for always ?  
S: Siempre .  
T: Siempre . So, how would you say we always get lost ?  
S: Siempre perdemos… Siempre nos perdemos .  
T: Good. Siempre nos perdemos , or nos perdemos siempre . But:  
S: Pero .  
T: We didn’t get lost yesterday :  
S: No perdimos… No nos perdimos ayer .T: Good. Nos perdemos siempre, pero no nos perdimos ayer . Very good. There we see in that 
sentence, perdemos  for present and perdimos  for past. But, of course, with -ir verbs, they have 
the same version for both. So, we could say, for example, we don’t go out often, but we went out 
yesterday . And often  is a menudo , a menudo . Menudo  is like a literary word that's not used very 
often for small,  related t o minute,  actually, or miniscule,  it’s not used very often in that sense, in 
the sense of small . But a menudo is used very often to mean often.  So, we don’t go out often :  
S: No salimos a menudo .  
T: But we went out yesterday :  
S: Pero salimos ayer.  
T: Go od, very good. So, here we have the present and the past in this sentence and we see that both 
of them are salimos.  No salimos a menudo, pero salimos ayer . Let’s make a re cap. So, let’s do 
it with hablar  and comer,  which we will use as our hook verbs. So,  I spoke :  
S: Hablé .  
T: He spoke :  
S: Habló .  
T: We spoke :  
S: Hablamos .  
T: And comer is to eat . So, I ate:  
S: Comí .  
T: He ate :  
S: Comió .  
T: We ate :  
S: Comimos .  
T: Very good.