Track 61  
T: You remember how to say to call ? You need to open the assoc iation between to call  and to phone  
and to call myself , my name is , and then you remember it.  
S: Llamar .  
T: Yes. Llamar . Now we can look a little bit at how the line in the past and the dot in the past interact. 
Now, we do this in some very common struct ures in both languages. For example, you might say 
something like I was cooking when the phone rang . So, I was cooking when the phone rang , which 
part is the line? And which part is the point?  
S: I was cooking  is the line.  
T: Good.  
S: The phone rang  is the dot.  
T: Good. So, let’s begin with I was cooking . What is to cook ?  
S: Cocinar .  
T: Cocinar . Good. I was cooking :  
S: Cocinaba .  
T: When :  
S: Cuando .  
T: Cuando . The phone rang . El teléfono is the phone , like in English, which is actually from Greek . 
This first bit, tele-, means far, distant,  and phone  means voice.  It’s the “distant voice ”, it’s the 
telephone . So when the phone rang , and we will say when the phone sounded . And to sound  is 
sonar.  Sonar . So when the phone sounded :  
S: Cuando el teléfon o sonó .  
T: All together, I was cooking when the phone rang.  Not from memory but thinking it through again. 
I was cooking when the phone rang :S: Cocinaba cuando el teléfono sonó.  
T: Very good. Cocinaba cuando el teléfono sonó , or cocinaba cuando sonó el  teléfono , which 
would probably be more natural order in Spanish. Cocinaba cuando sonó el teléfono . But both 
orders are perfectly fine. To arrive  was llegar . Llegar , to arrive .  
S: Llegar .  
T: And this is l-l, so we have the double l, which is like a y sound, e-g-a-r. –ar verb, llegar.   
S: Llegar .  
T: I arrived :  
S: Llegué .  
T: Llegué . He arrived :  
S: Llegó .  
T: Llegó . We arrived :  
S: Llegamos .  
T: Llegamos . Good. I was speaking on the phone when Maria arrived.  And we’re not going to say 
literally on the ph one in Spanish. We will say por, por teléfono , by phone . Por can also mean by.  
So I was speaking on the phone when Maria arrived :  
S: Hablaba por teléfono cuando María llegó .  
T: Very good. Hablaba por teléfono cuando María llegó . Or hablaba por teléfono cuando llegó 
María . Either way. Good. So we can see how we’re using the line and the point together. If you 
were to look up to stay  in the dictionary, you would find quedarse.  Then, you need to do something 
with that se so if you wanted to say I stayed , how would it be?  
S: Me quedé .  
T: Me quedé . He stayed ? Or she stayed , or you (formal) stayed , it stayed :  
S: Se quedó .T: Se quedó . And we stayed :  
S: Nos quedamos.  
T: Nos quedamos . Which, of course, could also mean we stay  or we are staying.  Good. What w as to 
please ? The verb that we use to express like. To please :  
S: Gustar .  
T: Gustar . Good. And if you want to say I like it , you say it pleases me.  So how do you say I like it ?  
S: Me gusto. Me lo gusto .  
T: We’re working on intuition, no? We’ve got me and it and we’re throwing it all in there. But we 
must -  
S: Sorry, me gusta .  
T: Yes. We must process it literally. It pleases me.  It pleases , gusta.  It pleases me , me gusta . Good.  
Now if you want to say I liked it , you just say, of course, it pleased me . So how would that be?  
S: “Me gusté .” Sorry, me gustó .  
T: Me gustó . Good. Me gusté , what does that mean? Me gusté ?  
S: I pleased myself.   
T: I liked myself.  Ah? Me gustó , it pleased me , I liked it.  Good. I didn’t like it :  
S: No me gustó .  
T: No me gust ó. I didn’t like it , it didn’t please me . Apart from the point in the past, you could also 
use the line in the past here depending on the context. So how would you say that? It wasn’t 
pleasing me :  
S: No me gustaba .  
T: No me gustaba . So with this line and  point, we’re not looking for direct translations from English. 
We are looking to understand the concept of the line in time and the point in time and applying it 
directly in Spanish. Because in English you would never say something like I wasn’t liking it . Anda lot of the time it’s totally interchangeable in Spanish. No me gustó , no me gustaba , just means 
you’re thinking in a different way when you say it. No me gustó , you’re referring to something as 
an event, as something closed. And no me gustaba , you’ re thinking about something as an ongoing 
thing that occurred over a period of time. Really, a lot of the time that difference between the point 
and the line in time just originates in the mind. Parecer , parecer , was to seem . Parecer .  
S: Parecer .  
T: It’s  related to apparent  and we have aparecer  in Spanish, which means to appear .  
S: Is transparent  similar?  
T: Transparent  also is related, yes of course. Good. So parecer  is to seem . How would you say it 
seems to me ? It seems to me :  
S: Me parece .  
T: Good. It seems good to me , or in Spanish it seems well to me :  
S: Me parece bien .  
T: Me parece bien . How would you say it seemed good to me ?  
S: Me parecí .  
T: It seemed :  
S: Ah, yes of course. Me pareció bien.   
T: Good. Me pareció bien . It seemed good to me.  And you might want to use the line in the past. 
You might want to say, like, it was seeming good to me.  So even though this is not a translation 
you would use in English, in Spanish you’re just thinking about do I mean a point in time or do I 
mean o ngoing in this context? So we might want it was seeming to me well.  How would you say 
that?  
S: Parecer  becomes parecía.  Me parecía bien .  
T: Good. Me parecía bien . It seemed good to me, but when I saw it I didn’t like it . So it seemed good 
to me , it was s eeming good to me :S: Me parecía bien .  
T: But:  
S: Pero .  
T: When I saw it :  
S: Cuando lo vi.   
T: I didn’t like it :  
S: No me gustó.   
T: Very good. Me parecía bien , pero cuando lo vi , no me gustó . And again, here we see the 
interaction, no? Between the l ine and the point. Me parecía bien , it was seeming ok, fine, to me , 
pero cuando lo vi , but when I saw it , this is a very clear point in the past, I didn’t like it , in that 
moment when I saw it I didn’t like it . Again the point in the past. Me parecía bien , pero cuando 
lo vi, no me gustó . Excellent.