Track 62  
T: What was to give  in Spanish?  
S: Dar.  
T: Dar. Good. Now dar is irregular in this point in the past, in that whilst it’s an -ar verb it behaves 
like an -er/-ir verb. It’s the only verb that has th is particular peculiarity, the only verb that just 
switches sides like this in this point in the past. So, how would you say I gave ?  
S: Di.  
T: Di. Good. D-i, di. And he gave , she gave , it gave , you (formal) gave :  
S: Dío.  
T: And where is the accent?  
S: Sorry, dio.  
T: Dio. Good. Dio. We gave :  
S: Dimos .  
T: Dimos . Good. How would you say he gave me ?  
S: Me dio .  
T: Good. Me dio . And he gave me it :  
S: Me lo dio .  
T: Me lo dio . He gave us it , he gave it to us :  
S: Nos lo dio .  
T: Good. Nos lo dio . He didn’t give it to us :  
S: No nos lo dio .  
T: Good. No nos lo dio . I gave it to you  (speaking informally) I gave you it , I gave it to you :  
S: Did we do it?T: I gave :  
S: Ah, I gave .  
T: So your mind went to you gave , ah?  
S: Yes.  
T: So how do you  control that, how do you stop that happening?  
S: Cutting it up.  
T: Ok, so your first thought, what is it? Your first thought when you want to build I gave you it , I 
gave it to you .  
S: I gave .  
T: Exactly. And then the rest flows off. So I gave y ou it, speaking informally?  
S: Te lo di .  
T: Te lo di . Good. So it’s not a new thing for us to have two of these small words together, nos lo , te 
lo, me lo . What we didn’t see so far is having two words together, two of these small words 
together, where both of them begin with l. That’s because in Spanish, when that happens, a 
phonetic change occurs. So for example, if I wanted to say I gave it to him , it should be le lo di . 
But - and this isn’t about grammar, it’s about phonetics, it’s about sound  - Spanish doesn’t like 
that. Spanish doesn’t like the sound of those two l’s together: le lo. Doesn’t like it. So where we 
would have le lo, les lo , les los , le los , any combination of / l/-/l/ together with these small words, 
the first one is going to turn int o se. So another se. Ah? But a totally different use, and it’s not 
changing any meaning, it’s just a phonetic issue. So this means that le lo, les lo , become se lo. So 
how would you say I gave it to him ?  
S: Se lo di .  
T: Good. Se lo di . How would you sa y I gave it to you guys  or to them ?  
S: Se lo di .T: Se lo di . The same. So it is really just a phonetic change. It’s got nothing to do with the different 
meanings that we saw for se, like himself  and herself  that we saw before. Ah? It’s just a phonetic  
change because Spanish doesn’t like having these two l’s together. Se lo di : I gave it to you guys ,  
I gave it to them , I gave it to him , I gave it to her , I gave it to you (formal). How would you say I 
gave them to him ?  
S: Se los di .  
T: Perfect. Well  done. Se los di . So, of course this means that there could be many ambiguities. So 
now is a good time to look at how we can make these clarifications. Generally, not just in this 
structure, but generally. So for example, how would you say I gave him somet hing? I gave him 
something :  
S: Le di algo .  
T: Le di algo . So in this case, we might want to clarify as well, because of course le di algo could 
mean I gave him something , I gave her something , I gave you (formal) something . So how do we 
make that clari fication? It’s simple. We repeat the whole sentence, and then we say afterwards to 
him, to her . For example, le di algo a él , le di algo a ella . How would you clarify I gave something 
to you , speaking formally ?  
S: Le di algo a usted .  
T: Good. Le di a lgo a usted . So actually, we’re repeating, no? We don’t get rid of that le because we 
put a usted , which is excellent for the learner. Because it means you don’t have to worry about 
changing the structure of the sentence when you’re clarifying, using this a to clarify, because 
you’re repeating. Now, we saw before we didn’t have this situation. For example, we could say 
me lo compra , he buys it for me , or lo compra para mí . We don’t repeat the me there. But with 
this a, with this a that we use to clarify, we  will always repeat. Le di algo a él . It’s like an 
afterthought. Le di algo a ella . You don’t have to go back and restructure because you’ve made 
that clarification. So going back to this situation when we have two /l/’s together, what was to sell ?  
S: Vender .  
T: Vender . And how would you say I sold ?S: Vendí .  
T: Vendí . And I sold it :  
S: Lo vendí .  
T: Lo vendí . And I sold him it :  
S: L- … se lo vendí .  
T: Very good. It would be le lo vendí , but we don’t like this sound in Spanish, so we just say se lo 
vendí . But of course, se lo vendí is very ambiguous. Most of the time we’re going to know what 
we’re talking about because of the context. Usually when we’re speaking we mentioned already 
what or who we’re speaking about. But if you want to clarify it, if you want to be emphatic, you 
can add on afterwards to him . So, how would you do that? I sold it to him :  
S: Se lo vendí a él .  
T: Good. So we’re just repeating. Se lo vendí a él . This is probably because this a is actually quite 
flexible. We can use it to clarify, but not just for the preposition to. For example, if I say me lo 
compra a mí , and I use this a to emphasize mí, a mí, to me  literally, could mean from me , he buys 
it from me . Or it could mean for me , he buys it for me . Me lo compra a mí . So thi s a is a bit special. 
We’re using it to clarify and it can replace or represent other prepositions, other than to, which is 
its literal translation. And because it has this special use, we are always repeating with  
a. Whereas, as we saw before, with the o ther prepositions, we are not repeating. Me lo compra, 
lo compra para mí.  No repetition there. But if we use a to make this clarification, we repeat. Me 
lo compra a mí . Ah? So you repeat. Se lo vendí a él . How would you say I sold it to her ?  
S: Se lo vendí a ella.  
T: Se lo vendí a ella . What if you wanted to say I sold them to her ?  
S: Se los vendí a ella .  
T: Very good. Se los vendí a ella . What if they were feminine things that you sold to her?  
S: Se las vendí a ella.T: Good. Se las vendí a ella. So what if actually you sold them  to them,  not to her? So now, we’re 
going to say I sold them , those feminine things, to them , mixed or masculine group.  
S: Se los vendí -  
T: Feminine things.  
S: Sorry, se las vendí a ellos .  
T: Se las vendí a ellos . Good. What was to send ?  
S: Enviar .  
T: Enviar . Good. How would you say he sent ?  
S: Envió .  
T: Envió . He sent me it :  
S: Me lo envió.  
T: Good. He sent us it :  
S: Nos le - sorry - nos lo envió .  
T: Nos lo envió . he sent you it  (speaking informally):  
S: Te lo envió.   
T: Perfect. Te lo envió . So we have no problem with me lo , nos lo , te lo, but of course we can’t have 
le lo. So if you want to say he sent it to her , how will it be?  
S: Se lo envió.  
T: Good. You want to clarify, go ahead.  
S: A ella .  
T: Good. Se lo envió a ella . And of course we could clarify he as well. Él se lo envió a ella . So it’s 
like you have this base structure, se lo envió , and you can clarify around it. Él se lo envió . Se lo 
envió a ella.  Él se lo envió a ella . But what is not changing there is that bit, se lo envió . He sent 
it to them :S: Se lo envió a ellos.  
T: Good. And what if it was to you guys ? He sent it to you guys :  
S: Se lo envió a ustedes.  
T: Good. Se lo envió a ustedes . He didn’t send it to you guys yet . He didn ’t send it to you guys yet:   
S: It’s no se lo envió a ustedes … and I forgot yet.  
T: “All way”.  
S: Ah, todavía .  
T: Todavía . Good. So, no se lo envió a ustedes todavía . No se lo envió todavía a ustedes , could go 
that way around as well. I don’t know if I sent it to him, I don’t know if I sent it to him:   
S: No sé si envié – lo envié – se lo envié.  
T: Good. No sé si se lo envié . Excellent. So when we’re using this a for clarification or emphasis, we 
are repeating. Se lo envié a él . Se lo compré a ella . So we repeat when we’re using this a for 
emphasis or for clarification. But if we use another preposition, like para  for example, lo compré 
para usted , lo compré para ti . Then we don’t repeat. So these very specific details of language, 
I don’t want anybody t o worry or stress about remembering or memorizing them. Remember, as 
long as you are actively listening and analyzing the Spanish that you expose yourself to, even if 
you forget it now, you will notice it again for yourself through listening, analyzing, co mparing, 
with the skills that we’ve developed during this course. So our focus is to understand it, not to 
memorize it.