Track 63  
T: To remember  in Spanish, to remember  in Spanish is acordarse . Acordarse . So it’s acordar . It 
just means, this -se on the en d, just means that when we use this verb we need to say I remember 
myself to give the meaning of I remember . So how would you say I remember ?  
S: Is it acuerdo ?  
T: Good. The -o splits.  
S: It’s, uh...  yeah.  
T: So, I remember :  
S: Me acuerdo .  
T: Me acu erdo . I don’t remember :  
S: No me acuerdo.  
T: No me acuerdo . I don’t remember.  No me acuerdo . Good. So, I don’t remember if I gave it to 
him or to her. I don’t remember if I gave it to him or to her . So, I don’t remember :  
S: No me - no me acuerdo.  
T: If I gave it to him or to her :  
S: Si lo- si se lo di a él o ella.  
T: Or to her :  
S: O a ella.  
T: Good. No me acuerdo si se lo di a él o a ella . Very good. How would you say we don’t remember 
if we gave it to him or to them ? And we mean feminine them . So, we don’t remember is the first 
bit:  
S: No nos acordamos.  
T: Good. No nos acordamos because here we are not stressing the -o. It’s not going to split. No nos 
acordamos . If:S: Si.  
T: We gave it to him or to them  (female group):  
S: Lo dimos , isn’t that  right?  
T: The to when we actually say to him or to them is the clarification. It’s the repetition.  
S: Se lo dimos.  
T: To him or to them . Feminine them :  
S: A él o a ellas.  
T: Good. So all together. We don’t remember if we gave it to him or to them  (feminine):  
S: No acordamos.  
T: Where is the se in no acordamos ? Where is the se of acordarse?   
S: No nos acordamos.  
T: It became nos.  
S: Si se lo dimos a él o a ellas.  
T: Well done. No nos acordamos si se lo dimos a él o a ellas . What was he likes it , it is pleasing to 
him?  
S: Le lo gusta.  
T: Make sure you take the mid road until you are extremely comfortable with how gustar  works.  
Take the mid road of it is pleasing to him :  
S: Ah, le gusta.  
T: Good. Le gusta . She likes it :  
S: La gusta . No, le gusta.  
T: Le gusta . It’s still to her . It is pleasing to her . Le gusta . So le gusta could mean he likes it, she 
likes it . What else could it mean? It is pleasing to  who else?S: Usted .  
T: Good. So maybe here you want to clarify le gusta , it’s not very ob vious who you mean. By the 
context it might be, but we’re seeing especially with this group of he, she, and it and usted  all 
together , many times we are wanting to clarify. So bearing in mind that the structure is it is pleasing 
to him, it is pleasing to h er, it is pleasing to you, how are you going to clarify? If you want to 
clarify that you mean she likes it :  
S: Le gusta a ella.  
T: A ella . Good. So this is why it’s important to take that mid translation as well. Otherwise you 
would probably just say ella le gusta , which would mean she’s pleasing to whoever that  le is. We 
would just understand that somebody likes her. She is pleasing to , ah? So, to make it clear we need 
to put the a. Le gusta a ella . A ella le gusta . To her it is pleasing. It is pleasi ng to her .  
And if we wanted to say he liked it , it was pleasing to him :  
S: So it’s gustó.   
T: Good.  
S: Le gustó.  
T: So this could mean it was pleasing to him, it was pleasing to her , it was pleasing to  you (formal), 
could be any combination of he, she, it, or you (formal) liking . He, she, it or you (formal ). So how 
would you clarify? How would you say it was pleasing to her ? She liked it, it was pleasing to her :  
S: Le gustó a ella.  
T: Le gustó a ella . Good.