Track 66  
T: So, we are looking a bit at possession now, and how we express that in Spanish. Now, in English 
we use possessive words: my, your, his, her, much more than we do in Spanish. So, it’s something 
we want to look out for. We already saw an example actually, for example, how we would say I 
responded him the mail , rather than I responded to his mail . Another example would be how we 
refer to body  parts in Spanish. So you don’t say in Spanish, for example, my leg hurts , you say it 
hurts me the leg . Doler , doler,  is to hurt . How would you say, firstly, it hurts me , from doler?  It 
hurts me :  
S: Me dolo .  
T: It hurts me :  
S: Lo me -  
T: I want you to divide the sentence up and to take control of it, no guessing. It hurts me :  
S: Dole .  
T: Good, it would be “ dole”, but the o splits. So, this is an error that’s not a problem, you thought it 
through and you got to “ dole”, but the o splits here.  
S: So, me duele .  
T: Me duele . Good. Me duele . So, you don’t say in Spanish my leg hurts – “mi pierna duele ” – you 
don’t say that, you say it hurts me the leg,  it hurts me the leg . So, leg is pierna,  how would you 
say my leg hurts ?  
S: Me duele la pierna .  
T: Goo d. Me duele la pierna . If you want to say my leg doesn’t hurt anymore , you can just use more  
for anymore.  So, what was more,  again?  
S: Más.  
T: Más. So, my leg doesn’t hurt anymore :  
S: No me duele la pierna más .T: Good. Now, the noun, pain,  is dolor , dolor.   
S: Dolor .  
T: If you want to say I have a headache , you can just say I have pain of head – dolor de cabeza , 
dolor de cabeza . So, how would that be, I have a headache ?  
S: Tengo dolor de cabeza .  
T: Good. Tengo dolor de cabeza . Good. I had, I was h aving, pain of head , so, the line in the past.  
S: Tenía dolor de cabeza .  
T: Good. Tenía dolor de cabeza . And of course we can also say me duele la cabeza or me dolía la 
cabeza – this would be another way of saying it. So, just as we can say dolor de cabe za to say 
headache , the ache of the head . If we want to say José’s house , Maria’s house , in Spanish we will 
say the house of Maria , the house of José . So, how would you say the house of José, José’s house ?  
S: La casa de José .  
T: So, how would you say we are going to José’s house ?  
S: Vamos a la casa de José .  
T: Good. Vamos a la casa de José . What if you wanted to say we are going to Maria’s party,  we are 
going to Maria’s party :  
S: Vamos a la fie -  
T: That’s correct.  
S: Vamos a la fiesta de Mar ía.  
T: Yes. Vamos a la fiesta de Mar ía. Very good. What was nobody ?  
S: Nadie .  
T: Nadie . And nobody else or nobody more :  
S: Nadie más.T: Good. I didn’t speak with anybody else in Maria’s party. I didn’t speak with anyone else in Maria’s 
party, I only spoke with you.  So, let’s start from the beginning. I didn’t speak :  
S: No hablé.  
T: With anybody else :  
S: Con nadie más.  
T: In Maria’s party :  
S: En la fiesta de Mar ía.  
T: Good. No hablé con nadie más en la fiesta de Mar ía, I only spo ke with you . Now, only or just, 
that we say a lot in English, I just spoke with you , I only spoke with you , in Spanish is solo, solo.   
So, I only spoke with you  (speaking informally):  
S: Hablaste ,  
T: I only spoke , with you , don’t let it blend together.  
S: Hablé contigo solo.  
T: Good. Or, more naturally might be solo hablé contigo . But solo at the end there, it’s fine, it just  
sounds more emphatic, you might want to be emphatic here: no hablé con nadie más en la fiesta 
de Maria, solo hablé contigo . Hablé solo contigo, hablé contigo solo .