Track 67  
T: I would like to talk a little bit more about writing in Spanish. So, we haven’t really looked so much 
about how to read and write in Spanish, we’ve spelled some words, we’ve discussed some sounds 
and we ’ve looked at convertible words , convertible  words that we convert over from Latin English 
into Spanish, and they give us a great idea about how to read and write in Spanish.  
For example, if we have a / j/ sound, for example in general,  how is this pronou nced in Spanish?  
S: /kheneral /.  
T: /kheneral /. And it’s spelled the same. So, there we understand that g-e makes / khe/ sound without 
having to learn it formally, we can just look back to these convertible words when we are unsure 
of how a sound might be pronounced. So, maybe you see c-e together and you are like “is that / se/ 
or is that / ke/?” But then if you look back to concentración , then you have your answer: “con-
cen”: c-e, concentración  gives you your answer. So, apart from the actual sounds we also  need to 
understand where the stress in any given word is when we read it. So, in Spanish, you may have 
noticed you have written accents, little dashes above some vowels. Now, this isn’t like French, for 
example, where the little dashes might actually change the sound of the vowel . None of that, 
luckily, is going on in Spanish. The written accent is just showing the stress, but why do we have 
it sometimes and not other times? So, there is a general rule in Spanish, which is: if the word ends 
in a vowel, an n, or an s, the accent should be on the penultimate syllable, on the second last 
syllable. Now, why do you think vowels and then n’s and s’s have been singled out for that role, 
what if you look at our verbs? What do our verb forms end in?  
S: W ell the “they” end in an n.  
T: Right.  
S: Ah yes, s as well.  
T: Or?  
S: Vowel.  
T: Exactly. So, it’s what our verbs end in: an n, s, or vowel. So, Spanish says if a word ends in n, s, 
or a vowel, then natural accent will be on the penultimate syllable , the second last syllable.Diferente , habla , hablan , hablas , hablamos , ending s, but we are adding two syllables, so still 
on the second last, hablamos . Importante , adictivo . Now, if the word ends in any other 
consonant, any other consonant that ’s not n or s, then the natural accent place is to go to the end 
of the word, and we see this perfectly with any “to” verb. How do you say to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Accent on the end. Comer . To be , for states?  
S: Estar .  
T: Estar . To speak :  
S: Hablar .  
T: Hablar .  To find :  
S: Encontrar .  
T: Encontrar . So, this r is not an n or an s or a vowel, and what that means is that the accent is coming 
on the end. So, these are our natural accents, and if the word obeys the rules of the natural accents, 
we have no  written accent, generally, there's a couple of exceptions which I will mention. So, if 
there is no written accent, you follow those rules. If it ends n, s, or vowel, you put the accent on 
the second last syllable, and if it ends in any other consonant you  are putting the accent on the end. 
But if your word breaks th is rule, then you have a written accent to show you where you should 
be stressing. So, for example, what is tradition  in Spanish?  
S: Tradición .  
T: Tradición . And what are you ending it wit h? What is the last letter?  
S: n.  
T: And where is the accent?  
S: At the end.  
T: At the end. Does this break our rule?  
S: Yes.T: So, the /o/ will have a written accent, that last o will have a written accent on the end, showing you 
that you are stres sing it. Tradición . So, all of these –ión words, that all have their accent on the 
end - situación , opinión  - they all have a written accent there on the end. So, now I’m gonna tell 
you some words, that we’ve come across already, and I want you to tell me if they will have a 
written accent or not. So, what you need to decide is “are they breaking the accent rule or not”.  
Encuentro .  Encuentro . Firstly, what does that mean, encuentro ?  
S: I encounter.   
T: Good, I find . Encuentro . Do we have a written acce nt there?  
S: No.  
T: No, good. Encontró . What does that mean first, encontró ?  
S: I- sorry. He/she/it  or you (formal) found .  
T: Good. And does it have a written accent?  
S: Yes.  
T: Yes, because it’s breaking the rule, we're ending in a vowel and we ha ve the accent on the end. So, 
all of these, in that point in the past, are gonna have the accent. Encontró, habló, llamó, llegó . 
Good. Vive . Vive . Firstly , what does that mean? Vive : 
S: He/she/it/you  (formal) live.  
T: Good. Does it have an accent?  
S: No.  
T: Good. Vivió :  
S: It has an accent.  
T: Where?  
S: At the o.T: Good. Vivió  – he lived, she lived, you  (formal) lived, it lived . Limón , what do you think limón  
means?  
S: Lemon .  
T: Lemon . Good. Which is a Persian word actually, and it actual ly was used to talk about citrus fruits 
generically, generally, and lime came from the same word, so lemon  and lime is actually the same 
word essentially. Does it have an accent, limón ?  
S: Yes.  
T: Yes, cause it should be LI-mon , right, but it’s not,  it’s li-MÓN , it’s breaking that rule, so it has a 
written accent. So, when we are reading Spanish, if the word ends in a vowel, an n, or an s, we 
want to put the accent on the penultimate syllable . If it ends in another consonant, we wanna put 
the accent on the end, unless we are shown with a written accent that the rule is being broken. 
Salud  means health,  related to salute  in English. Salud,  and you can say it when you toast. Does 
it have a written accent?  
S: No.  
T: No, good, it ends in a d, so we expect the accent to be on the end, salud . So, usually accents are 
written to show us that we are breaking the accent rule, but there are some other situations where 
we have a written accent. One of these situations is when we have words that are m onosyllables – 
words that are just one syllable - and we can differentiate them with a written accent. For example, 
how was the word for yes?  
S: Sí.  
T: And how was the word for if?  
S: Si.  
T: Si. It’s the same word, so yes is written with a written accent, and if is not . Now th is written accent 
doesn’t change the pronunciation, this differentiates them so when you are reading you don’t have 
the ambiguity that could sometimes be caused by “oh, is that a yes or an if?”, both could make 
sense the re, especially because you use yes emphatically, in Spanish you can say sí lo quiero , yes 
I want it , but if that’s written and you don’t hear the emphasis, sí lo quiero , then you might readif I want it . So, to clear up that ambiguity when you have monosyl lables - words of one syllable -  
that are the same, one will take an accent to show the difference. How was for me ?  
S: Para mí  or por mí .  
T: Good, very good, either one, depending what for you want. Now, how was my house ?  
S: Mi casa .  
T: Mi casa . So, this is different mi: one is the mí that comes after prepositions – para mí , por mí , de 
mí – and the other one is for possession – my. So, para mí : there you have the written accent on 
the mí of para mí , and you don’t have it on mi casa , just to show the difference. What was the 
word for you, speaking informally?  
S: Tú.  
T: Tú. And what was your house ?  
S: Tu casa.   
T: Tu casa . The word for you, tú, takes a written accent, but the word for your in your house , tu casa , 
doesn’t. So, monosyllables that  are the same are differentiated by accent. I know , how do you say 
I know ?  
S: Sé.  
T: Yes, this sé has a written accent; the se of se lo doy , I give it to him , the se of se queda , he remains 
himself/she remains herself , doesn’t have an accent; only the sé of saber , I know , has one. So, it’s 
something you will pick up reading. Another example where we have accents is to differentiate 
question words from non -question words when they are the same. For example you have donde , 
what does donde  mean?  
S: Where .  
T: Where . But sometimes donde  is a question word, like ¿dónde estás ? Where are you ? There it will 
go with an accent, but if I say I’m going to meet him where we saw the football , this is not a 
question, so it doesn’t have an accent, so Span ish likes to differentiate them as well. But now we 
are entering quite a bit of detail and many Spanish speakers, when they are writing, make thesemistakes as well and don’t put these accents where they should, but I’m explaining just in case you 
come acr oss dónde  with an accent and you don’t understand why it’s there because it’s not 
breaking the accent rule – this is why. So, in the same way we have como , which means how or 
like, the cómo  for how takes an accent and the como  for like doesn’t. So, there a re a couple of 
grammatical examples, when we are having accents just to differentiate words that are the same or 
to differentiate question words from non -question words, but most of the time they are directing 
us to break the accenting rules. And it’s very  easy to remember the accenting rules because we 
only need to look at the present tense. We know that our verbs end in vowels, n’s or s’s, and in the 
present tense we always have the accent on the penultimate syllable without any written accent, 
with, of c ourse, that one exception, estar , where we have estás , están , está and we do have a 
written accent. So we can look back there at the present tense to remind us that if the word ends n, 
s, or vowel, the natural accent is on the penultimate syllable, like t he verbs in the present tense, 
and if it ends in any other letter, the  natural accent is on the end of the word. And if we break this 
rule we show it with a written accent.