Track 68  
T: What was tonight  in Spanish, tonight ?  
S: Esta noche.  
T: Esta no che. Good, “this night”. And we can use this as a hook to work out the other this’s and 
that’s and these  and those  that we might need. So, esta noche , which tells us that noche  is what 
kind of noun, what gender?  
S: Feminine.  
T: Feminine. Good, and what i f you wanted to say that night ? What do you do to esta to get that?  
S: Esa.  
T: Esa. Good, take away the t, good, so that night :  
S: Esa noche.   
T: Esa noche . And those nights :  
S: Esas noches .  
T: Esas noches . Good. The word for man is hombre , hombre , h-o-m-b-r-e, hombre .  
S: Hombre .  
T: Good. How would you say this man ?  
S: Esta hombre .  
T: You think hombre  is a feminine word?  
S: No. Este hombre.  
T: Este hombre . Good. That man:   
S: Ese hombre.  
T: Good. You can also say el hombre este , el hombre ese , to say this man or that man in Spanish, 
which might be a structure taken from Arabic, because in Arabic you don’t really have to be in thepresent tense, so you can’t say this man , because you would understand from it that this is a man , 
so in Arabic it’s  the same : alrajul hdha  - el hombre este . As I mentioned before when languages 
come into contact, like the eight hundred years between Spanish and Arabic, they don’t just share 
vocabulary. How would you say these men ?  
S: Estos hombres.   
T: Good. Estos hombres . So, with este we have the /e/ of el, el hombre , este hombre , and with estos  
we have the -os of los, los hombres , estos hombres , these men . How about those men ?  
S: Esos hombres.  
T: Esos hombres . Good. So, this means that we hav e este and esta for this, when we are referring to 
a masculine noun or a feminine noun. But sometimes we say this just generally, oh, I can’t believe 
this, we don’t mean a specific noun when we say I can’t believe this , so we have like a neuter this, 
that is not masculine or feminine, and that one is esto. So, creer  is to believe , creer , with two e’s. 
How would you say I don’t believe this ?  
S: No creo esto.  
T: Good. No creo esto . Good. I don't believe this . How would you say I don’t like anything more t han 
this? In Spanish we will say nothing pleases me more than this , nothing pleases me more than this , 
I don’t like anything more than this :  
S: Nada me gusta más que esto.   
T: Good. Nada me gusta más que esto . How would you say nothing pleased me mor e than that ? I 
didn’t like anything more than that, nothing pleased me more than that :  
S: Nada me gusta -  
T: Nothing pleased me :  
S: Nada me gustó más que eso.  
T: Good. Nada me gustó más que eso . Nothing pleased me more than that, I didn’t like anythin g 
more than that. Nada me gustó más que eso . Tan, tan, in Spanish means so, like in the sense of 
so tired , tan. T-a-n. How would you say so tired ?S: Tan cansado.  
T: Good. So, how would you say I was so tired , and we mean a line in time ?  
S: Estaba tan cansado.  
T: And you being feminine?  
S: Cansada .  
T: Good. Estaba tan cansada . What if you wanted to say we were so tired that we slept all day ? So, 
first bit is we were so tired , let’s be a masculine or mixed group, we were so tired :  
S: Estábamo s tan cansado - cansados.  
T: Good. Estábamos tan cansados , that we slept all day.  So what is this that?  
S: Que.  
T: Que. Estábamos tan cansados que  we slept all day.  Now, all day  is “all the day”, you remember 
how is day?  
S: Día.  
T: Día. And the day :  
S: La día.  
T: It would be, but -  
S: El día.  
T: El día . It ends in a, but it’s masculine. So, all day  is “all the day”, how would it be?  
S: Toda -  
T:  It’s masculine.  
S: Todo el día.  
T: We were so tired that we slept all day, we were so tired that we sl ept all day :  
S: Estábamos tan cansados que dormimos todo el día.T: Very good. Estábamos tan cansados que dormimos todo el día . So dormimos  could be we slept 
or we sleep , we know it’s the same in the present, but estábamos  tan cansados  gives us our 
conte xt, so we understand that of course it refers to past, estábamos tan cansados que dormimos 
todo el día . How would you say we were so tired when we arrived that we slept all day ? So, we 
were so tired :  
S: Estábamos tan cansados.  
T: When we arrived :  
S: Cuando llegamos.  
T: That we slept all day :  
S: Que dormimos todo el día.  
T: Good. Estábamos tan cansados cuando llegamos que dormimos todo el día . So, here in this 
sentence we have llegamos  and dormimos  that could be past or present, but estábamos  bring s us 
into the context right from the beginning, estábamos tan cansados cuando llegamos que 
dormimos todo el día . So, we said that when  was:  
S: Cuándo .  
T: Cuándo . And how much is cuánto , with a t, cuánto .  
S: Cuánto .  
T: Cuánto . How do you say again , like  another time ?  
S: Otra vez.  
T: Otra vez . Good. So, you could say how many times , how would that be? How many times :  
S: Cuántos veces - Cuántas veces?  
T: Cuántas veces . Good. We know it’s feminine, because we said otra vez , and not otro vez . So, we 
can, if we have a word like vez where it’s not obvious what is the gender, we need to look back to 
somewhere that we used it – otra vez , oh, ok, it’s feminine, cuántas veces , good. How would you 
say I don’t know how many times I visited him ? I don’t know how many times I visited him :S: No sé cuántas veces.  
T: I visited him :  
S: Lo visité.  
T: No sé cuántas veces lo visité . I don’t know how many times they visited him , I don’t know how 
many times they visited him :  
S: No sé cuántas veces los visitaron - oh, him- lo visitaron .  
T: Good. No sé cuántas veces lo visitaron . And what if you wanted to say I don’t know how many 
times they visited her ?  
S: No sé cuántas veces la visitaron.  
T: Good. No sé cuántas veces la visitaron.