Track 69  
T: So now we have a pan orama of times in Spanish. We’ve seen all of the different times. We can 
find will, would , the present, the pasts, the have  tenses. Maybe some of these we are clearer on 
than others, but we’ve learned how to find what we might think we don’t know and how t o analyze 
the language, so that through listening to Spanish we can reinforce the language that we’ve learned 
and bring it to the surface and pick up again anything that we might have forgotten along the way. 
But there is one more tense to learn in Spanish . One more very important tense in Spanish, and 
personally it’s my favorite thing about Spanish. In Spanish we have what we can call a mood tense, 
the subjunctive tense in grammatical terminology, but we will call it the mood tense because it’s a 
tense tha t just shows mood. Now, you might be interested to hear that we also have it in English. 
Now, we don’t use it as much in English as we do in Spanish but it is there. For example, in English 
you can say it is important that you are here  or it is important t hat you be here . So, it’s important 
that you are here  sounds more everyday, let’s say, more casual. It’s important that you be here ; 
that gives us a different feeling. It feels more serious, it feels more imperative. How are we 
achieving that feeling? We ’re using be instead of you are . We are using you be . It’s important that 
you be here . Another example of how English uses this mood, I might say had I gone, I would 
know. Had I gone, I would know . Now, had I , that inversion of I had to had I usually is to  make a 
question. Had you gone already? for example. But here it’s not a question. Had I gone, I would 
know . Here we are creating a mood tense. We are saying if I had gone with had I gone . We also 
say not only is it , for example, not only is it a problem, it’s the biggest problem . Not only is it , 
again, is it is what we do to make a question. But here it’s not a question. Not only is it a problem, 
it’s the biggest problem . So the changing of the order of is and it gives us this mood tense here in 
English as  well. So we don’t need to analyze too much how it works in English, because there’s 
not so much correlation between English and Spanish about how it works. It’s used much more 
extensively in Spanish. But the idea is not completely alien to us. In Spanish,  it’s a very common 
thing that will allow you and oblige you to perceive and to express the world in a certain way. 
Now, to form the mood tense, to form the subjunctive tense in Spanish, is very easy, and we don’t 
need to learn any new sounds to do it. All  we do is we switch between the verbs. With –ar verbs 
we will use the –er/-ir endings, and with –er/-ir verbs we will use the –ar verb endings. And that’s 
how we build this tense. So, for example, how is to speak ?S: Hablar .  
T: And how is he speaks ?  
S: Hablá .  
T: Habla .  
S: Sorry, habla. Habla.  
T: Habla . Good. The accent there at the beginning. Habla . Now if you want to make this the mood 
tense, we will switch groups. We we will switch groups. Verbs from the –ar group use –er/-ir 
endings, and verbs from the -er/-ir group use –ar endings. So how would you make habla  in the 
mood tense?  
S: Hable .  
T: Hable . Good. So you have they speak :  
S: Hablan .  
T: Hablan . And the mood tense version will be?  
S: Hablen .  
T: Hablen . Good. How is I speak ?  
S: Hablo .  
T: Hablo . Of course if we go from hablo  in the –ar group and we go to -er/-ir we will still have 
hablo . We will change an o for an o. So we don’t do that. Hablo  will also become hable . So again 
we have a situation where I jumps in with he, she, it , and you (formal). So hable  can also be the 
mood tense for I. What is we speak ?  
S: Hablamos .  
T: Hablamos . And the mood tense of we speak :  
S: Hablemos .T: Hablemos . Good. We are using the /e/, not that odd i that pops up with the –ir verbs in the present 
like vivimos , salimos . -emos  for the mood tense. Hablemos . What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . I eat:  
S: Como .  
T: Como . But the mood tense version would be?  
S: Coma .  
T: Good. Coma . And what else can coma  mean, then?  
S: He/she/it  version of the moo d tense.  
T: Good, and you (formal). Very good. They eat , normal tense, present tense?  
S: Comen .  
T: Comen . And the mood tense?  
S: Coman .  
T: Coman . Good. So it’s going to be great to practice this mood tense, because of course you have to 
first think wh at the verb should be, and then you switch it. So we’re going to have a nice practice 
mentally, in our mental exercises, of the tenses that we already learned whilst we are building the 
mood tense. So the use of the mood tense we can divide between obligat ory and optional. There 
are some situations in which we absolutely must use the mood tense, otherwise it will be 
considered an error. It will sound incorrect and distract from what we are saying. And then there 
are cases where the use of the mood tense is optional. You can use it to give a different meaning 
or a different flavor or a different feeling, which is the much more exciting area, where it’s 
optional. But the obligatory uses will allow us a very important exposure to the feeling of the mood 
tense. So now we’re going to look at some examples. In English when you say I want you to wait, 
I want you to wait , this is quite a peculiar structure in English. And it’s not really translated in this 
way in many other languages. I want you to wait . In most othe r Romance languages, at least, it’s 
translated as I want that you wait . This is how we would say it in French or Portuguese or Italian.So I want you to wait is I want that you wait . Now, this you wait is going to be in the mood tense. 
When we are expressi ng what we want in this way, we will use the mood tense. We are putting 
our subjectivity onto the world when we say I want that and following this that, we will use the 
mood tense. So how would you say I want you to wait ? I want that you wait  (informally ):  
S: So I want remains the same and it’s quiero . That is que. And then you wait becomes espere .  
Sorry, esperes .  
T: Good. All together, I want that you wait :  
S: Quiero que esperes.  
T: Good. Quiero que esperes . Ah? So if you say quiero que esperas , here it would be considered 
an error. This is an obligatory use of the subjunctive, of the mood tense. Quiero que esperes . I 
want you to wait for him , or I want you to wait for it :  
S: Quiero que lo esperes.  
T: Good. Quiero que lo esperes . I want you to w ait for it or for him.  Very good. Do you want me to 
wait?  So first let’s find the in -between sentence. Give it to me in English, how we will say it in 
Spanish. Do you want me to wait? :  
S: Do you want that I wait for you ?  
T: You made it more complicated. It’s just do you want that I wait?  But, let’s put it. So do you want 
me to wait for you?  Give me that one. Do you want me to wait for you?  And let’s speak informally.  
S: ¿Quieres que te espere?   
T: Very good. ¿ Quieres que te espere ? And of course this cou ld mean : Do you want me to wait for 
you? Do you want him to wait for you ? Do you want her to wait for you ? So if we wanted to clarify 
I, how would we do that? Do you want me to wait for you? :  
S: ¿Quieres que yo te espere ?  
T: Very good. ¿ Quie res que yo te espere ?