Track 7  
T: How would you say I want to carry on ? Now you think “ carry on , I don't know this!” So, one of 
the skills we want to really make use of these convertible words is to find the Latin equivalent of 
carry on. I want to carry on, I want to go on, I want to …? What is the Latin word that we could 
use here ? Nothing comes to mind?  
S: Like?  
T: So, think of -  
S: Ah, continue .  
T: So you can think of a -tion word that has something to do with carrying on?  
S: Continuation .  
T: Exactly, good. So, I want to continue:   
S: Quiero continuar.   
T: Quiero continuar . I want to continue it:   
S: Quiero continuarlo.   
T: Good. I am trying to continue:   
S: I’ve already forgotten what trying  is.  
T: So it's not about remembering, it's about knowing how to find it. So there are a few things you 
could think about, that wh en we discuss this word, that could lead you back to it, and the important 
thing is to take that time to have those thoughts rather than just, "Oh, do I know it? Do I not?"  
S: Intención.   
T: Intención.  There wasn't a rule here because it doesn't finish -ation. Our rule was for ones that 
finish -ation , but it was very similar. Do you remember what it is now?  I try, so it ends in -o like- 
S: Ah, intento .T: Intento , good, so that's I try. We want to see first if we can find it... relaxed, not... you kno w if 
your brain locks on "Do I remember it or don't I?" Game over. But if you go “ Okay , what was that 
related to , what was that about?" And just see what pops up, then you are much more likely to get 
it.  
So, Intento . Intento  is I try. I try or I am trying to continue:   
S: Intento continuar.   
T: Good. Intento continuar.   What is demostración ? Demostración :  
S: Demonstration .  
T: Demonstration . Do you notice something different though? There's some change here. 
Demostración ?  
S: There’s no n.  
T: Good. There's no n. Demostración . So how would you say to demonstrate ?  
S: Demostrar.   
T: Demostrar . Now if you get rid of that de-, how would it sound?  
S: Mostrar.   
T: Mostrar , and that means to show . To show . Mostrar . So we might think again, mostrar has no 
connection that we can hook on to, but usually when we have a look we can find some connection 
through English, Latin English, that helps us interiorize. Mostrar , to show . The word for 
something  is algo. Algo . A-l-g-o. Algo.   
S: Algo.   
T: Algo , good.  What was the word for you, like in I love you , how was I love you ?  
S: Te quiero.   
T: Te quiero , so it was te. So how would you say, I want to show you something , in this order, I want 
to show you something:   
S: Quiero mostrarte algo.T: Quiero m ostrarte algo.  I want to show you something . What again was I go or I am going and it 
was related to voyage  we said.  
S: Voy.   
T: The beginning bit of voyage , and you're mostly going to hear it pronounced more like a soft b.  
Voy.  Voy.   
S: Voy.   
T: Now, ju st as in English, we say I am going to...  and we talk about the future. I am going to continue. 
I am going to eat later . We can do exactly the same thing in Spanish. The only difference is that  
even though, for example, if we use continue – continuar - continuar  means to continue . In 
Spanish we say voy a continuar . It's actually because voy is a verb of movement, and when we 
are putting a "to" form, a verb that is "to" something like continuar  after a verb of movement, a 
verb that has some kind of motion i n its meaning like voy: I am going , Spanish wants to show this 
feeling of motion so you say I am going to  and you put the to for that movement, even if you're 
not actually moving and you're just using it to speak about the future.  
So, if you want to say, for example, I am going to confiscate it. I am going to confiscate it:   
S: Voy a confiscarlo.   
T: Good. Voy a confiscarlo.  Very good. How do you say I am going to examine it? I am going to 
examine it:   
S: Voy a examinarlo.   
T: Good. Voy a examinarlo.  Good.  Now we said lo is it or him. Now the plural of him is them . This 
is not very obvious in English because him and them , they look very different as words. We don't 
ever think of them  as the plural of him or of her but it is. It's very obvious in Spanish, lo means 
him or it and if you want to get them , if you want to make it plural, what do you think you might 
do?  
S: Just add the s? Los.T: Los. Good. So now we have the word for them . To see  is ver, ver. We have view in English, like 
view, ver. So how would  you say, I want to see them ?  
S: Quiero a verlos ?  
T: Why a here?  
S: Quiero verlos.   
T: Quiero verlos.  So, ver is to see. If you say I am going to see them , how is it going to be?  
S: Voy a verlos.   
T: Good. Voy a verlos . But if you say, I want to see th em?  
S: Quiero verlos.   
T: And if you say I am trying to see them ?  
S: Intento verlos.   
T: Good. No a. Intento verlos . Because ver is to see . To try , so trying  in its "to" form, to try  is 
intentar . Intentar . This is to try . So how would you say I want to t ry?  
S: Quiero intentar.   
T: Good. I am going to try:   
S: Voy a intentar.   
T: Good. With a. Voy a intentar.  I am going to try to see them ? I am going to try to see them:   
S: Voy a intentar a verlos . No, verlos .  
T: Very good.  
S: Voy intentar -  
T: Slower.   
S: Voy a intentar verlos .T: Good. Voy a intentar verlos.  Good. Let me give you another example of a verb that connects with 
this a, so voy isn't isolated, we can understand the concept better if we see another verb of 
movement. So another verb of movem ent is pasar . What do you think pasar  means?  
S: Is it to pass ?  
T: Yes, pasar  is to pass  and to pass by , so I'm going to pass by to visit you . I'm going to pass by to 
visit you . How would we say this? The first bit is I am going .  
S: Voy.   
T: Good. I am g oing to pass by:   
S: A pasar.   
T: Good. To visit you:   
S: Visitarlo,  visitarte.   
T: Well actually lo, other than him and it, can also mean formal you, so if you're speaking formally, 
you can use this lo as well. But I want to go back to pasar . Pasar  is a v erb of movement.  Let's 
take the sentence again from the beginning. The whole sentence is I'm going to pass by to visit 
you.  
S: Voy a. So it's voy a pasar a visitarlo .  
T: Good, lo if you are speaking formally or te if you are speaking informally. Voy a pasar a visitarte . 
Voy a pasar a visitarlo . Which would mean him, it or you (formal). How would you say formal , 
by the way, in Spanish?  
S: Formal.   
T: And formally:   
S: Formalmente.   
T: Very good. Now, if you want to say, I am going to try to pass by  to visit you  we have to think 
which ones we are going to use this a with and which ones not, which is a great exercise for us to 
internalise this rule. So, I am going to try:S: Voy a intentar.   
T: To pass by:   
S: A, no. Voy a intentar pasar.   
T: To visi t you:   
S: A visitarte.   
T: Very good. So we learned that rule. Voy a intentar pasar a visitarte . There's not many times that 
we have something between the verbs so there's not going to be a lot of rules like this, don't worry, 
but this one's important bec ause there are many important verbs of motion that we will be putting 
this a after. How was to demonstrate  again?  
S: Demonstrar.   
T: And what happened to that n?  
S: Demostrar.   
T: Demostrar. And what is to show ? You get rid of -  
S: Mostrar.   
T: Good. Mostrar. And the word for something  I mentioned was algo, algo.  
S: Algo.   
T: Something . I want to show you something . Let's speak informally. I want to show you something .  
So we're going to use te.  
S: Quiero mostrarte algo.   
T: Good. I want to show you som ething . Quiero mostrarte algo.  So maybe you call somebody and 
you say where are you ? I'm at home. I want to pass by to show you something. I want to pass by 
to show you something:   
S: Quiero pasar a  - what was it?  
T: To show you something .S: Mostrarte a lgo.  
T: Good. Quiero pasar a , because we had the verb of movement, mostrarte  algo. So if we are 
connecting a verb of movement to another verb we connect using this extra a, to. Quiero pasar a 
mostrarte algo . Good.