Track 70  
T: What was the word for what ?  
S: Qué.  
T: Qué. What , when it’s not a question, is lo que , lo que .  
S: Lo que.  
T: For example, if you want to say I saw what you’re doing , this is not a question, no? I saw what 
you’re doin g. Here, the what  is not a question. Here it’s lo que . I cooked what they’re eating . I 
cooked what they’re eating . Here, what  is not a question, no? Yo cociné , I cooked , lo que comen , 
or lo que están comiendo if we mean right now. So, what  not as a q uestion is  lo que . How would 
you say I don’t want you to speak about what we spoke about  - but you know we don’t need this 
about . So the first bit is I don’t want you to speak , and let’s speak informally. I don’t want you to 
speak, I don’t want that you sp eak:  
S: No quiero que hables .  
T: Very good. No quiero que hables . About :  
S: Is it de?  
T: De, you could use, or you could use?  
S: Sobre .  
T: Sobre . Good. So, no quiero que hables de , or sobre  what we spoke about , and we can just say 
what we spoke :  
S: Lo que hablamos.   
T: Yes. It’s the same in the past. So give it to me now all together. I don’t want you to speak about 
what we spoke about.  From the beginning and thinking it through again.  
S: No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos.  
T: Good. No quie ro que hables sobre lo que hablamos , or no quiero que hables de lo que 
hablamos . Good. But that sentence could be ambiguous, no? I mean, in your mind, when you’recreating this sentence you will have the context very strongly in your mind that you’re think ing 
about what we spoke about the other day. But that doesn’t necessarily mean that the person 
receiving it has that same context in their mind. They might, depends what your conversation is 
about. But if you don’t have a context that’s shared, it could be  ambiguous. You could understand 
I don’t want you to speak about what we speak about  generally . Because of course we have 
hablamos , which can be past or present. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos . 
Generally. So there’s two ways here that you could  clarify. You could add something like the other 
day, el otro día . No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablamos el otro día . So you are showing 
with some time expression that it was past. Or you could use the line in the past. What we were 
speaking about . Because here it’s interchangeable, the meaning changes so slightly and both 
meanings are fine, no? If we look at English, I don’t want you to speak about what we were 
speaking about . I don’t want you to speak about what we spoke about . So maybe here in Spani sh 
you choose the line in the past just so it’s obvious that you’re talking about the past. So let’s give 
it another go, using the line in the past. I don’t want you to speak about what we were speaking 
about. I don’t want you to speak  (informally still):  
S: No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablábamos .  
T: Very good. No quiero que hables sobre lo que hablábamos . Necessity  in Spanish is – do you 
remember what to do with -ity words to make them Spanish?  
S: -idad.  
T: Good. So necessity  becomes:  
S: Necesid ad.  
T: Necesidad . To need  is necesitar .  
S: Necesitar .  
T: Good. How would you say I need ?  
S: Necesito .  
T: Necesito . I need you to prepare it.  Let’s speak formally. I need you to prepare it  (formally):  
S: In English again it would be I need that you prepare it .T: Exactly.  
S: Necesito que lo prepare .  
T: Very good. Necesito que lo prepare . This is to you, formally. If you wanted to make it clear that 
you are speaking to you and not speaking about him or her, how would you do that here? I need 
you to  prepare it :  
S: Necesito que usted lo prepare .  
T: Very good. Necesito que usted lo prepare . Necesito que lo prepare usted . Very good. So with 
quiero que , necesito que , we’re seeing two things that they have in common. We have a verb like 
quiero , necesi to, a verb that’s showing what we want to occur in the world, expressing our 
subjectivity, let’s say, in this way, and we have the structural similarity that the mood tense is 
coming after que. To be short of, to be short of, to be missing, to lack , is faltar. Quite 
uncomfortable translations, but this is a very common verb in Spanish. Faltar . It’s used very often, 
this verb in Spanish. For example, you could say I need you to prepare what’s missing . I need you 
to prepare what’s missing . What’s left over, what we need to do still , ah? So again, formally, I 
need you to prepare :  
S: Necesito que prepare.  
T: Good. What’s missing .  
S: Lo que falta.  
T: Necesito que prepare lo que falta . And lo que because the what  here is not a question. Very good. 
The noun is  also used quite often. The noun is falta , la falta . So falta means lack, lack. So if I say 
falta de consideración , what does it mean? Falta de consideración :  
S: Oh, right. Lack of consideration .  
T: Good. Lack of consideration.  It’s also used with respec t, falta de respeto , lack of respect . And it’s 
also used in the expression hace falta . “It makes lack .” “It makes lack .” Which is just another way 
of saying it’s necessary , but it’s very common. And hace falta que of course is followed by this 
mood tense  in the same way that we do with quiero que , necesito que , we will follow it with thismood tense. So, if you wanted to say, using hace falta , it is necessary that we eat soon , what was 
the word for soon ?  
S: Is it pronto , or is that Italian?  
T: That ’s it. In Italian, actually, it means ready , pronto . This is why when Italians answer the phone, 
they say pronto , because historically, let’s say, there was an operator there connecting the wires. 
And they were there going ready? Are you ready? Is it ready ? Can you hear me? But in Spanish 
it’s soon . Like the British slang. People say in England get here pronto , get here soon . So it makes 
lack, hace falta , it makes lack that we eat soon :  
S: Sorry, can you explain again how, why does that make sense? It makes lack that we eat soon ?  
T: It makes lack  would be the literal translation, but literal translations are often uncomfortable, no? 
Especially when we’re talking about fixed expressions. So hace falta is an extremely common 
expression, quite difficult to  translate comfortably. Just another way of saying it’s necessary . So 
it makes lack or hace falta that we eat soon . How would it be?  
S: Hace falta que comamos pronto .  
T: Hace falta que comamos pronto . So hace falta you will hear around a lot, and falta  as a noun, 
you will hear it especially in phrases like falta de respeto , a lack of respect , you hear that a lot. 
And faltar  as a verb, to lack , or to be missing is also very useful. To prefer in Spanish is preferir . 
Preferir .  
S: Preferir .  
T: Preferir . How is I prefer ?  
S: Prefero .  
T: It should be.  
S: Prefiero .  
T: Better. Prefiero . Good. So again if you say I prefer him to stay , you’re not going to say I prefer 
him to stay , we will say I prefer that he stays , and what are we going to do with he st ays? I think 
you’re getting the gist now.S: Mood tense.  
T: Mood tense. So it’s not just the structures that we are identifying, it’s the feeling. This is very 
important for the mood tense. What you want to really get your head around is the feeling  of the 
mood tense, so you can start experimenting about where you would use it and listening out for 
where you hear people using it. I prefer that he stays, I prefer for him to stay, I prefer that he stays :  
S: Prefiero que se queda . Sorry, quede .  
T: Goo d. Prefiero que se quede . I prefer them to stay, I prefer for them to stay :  
S: Prefiero que se queden.  
T: Prefiero que se queden . I prefer that they don’t stay here . I prefer that they don’t stay here . I 
prefer for them not to stay here :  
S: Prefiero  que se – que no se queden aquí.   
T: Good. Prefiero que no se queden aquí . Very good. How would you say I prefer you to give it to 
him? I prefer you , speaking informally, to give it to him :  
S: So it's I prefer that you give it to him ?  
T: Exactly.  
S: Prefiero que lo le – ah, se lo des .  
T: That’s it. Good. Prefiero que se lo des . So this could mean I prefer you to give it to him, to her , 
how would we clarify it? If we want to show it’s to him. I prefer you to give it to him :  
S: Prefiero que se lo des a  él.  
T: Very good. And what if it was to her?  
S: A ella. Prefiero que se lo des a ella .  
T: Good. Prefiero que se lo des a ella. Very good. So to clarify we can then say  a él, a ella , to show 
afterwards who we meant with  se.