Track 71  
T: To count in Span ish is contar , contar .  
S: Contar .  
T: Contar . We can see that it’s the same word, but it’s also to recount , like in English how you say 
to recount a story . So, contar , you can also use it like to tell , especially with telling stories. How 
would you say I tell?  
S: I’m tempted to say cuento .  
T: Cuento , you would be correct, cuento , good, the o splits. So, cuento  is I tell , and cuento is the 
noun, meaning story , un cuento is a story . So, we can see how contar  is to count , but also to 
recount or another ve rb for to tell . C-o-n-t-a-r. So, how would you say I want you to tell me, I want 
you to recount to me  (informally )?  
S: Quiero que me cuentes.  
T: Good. Quiero que me cuentes . I want you to tell me something  and speaking plurally now, 
speaking to more than one you:  
S: Quiero que me cuenten algo.  
T: Good. Quiero que me cuenten algo . To count on , to count on,  in the sense of you can count on 
me, to count on is contar con , so, “to count with” in Spanish. So, how would you say I want you 
to count on me ? I want you to count on me  (speaking informally):  
S: Quiero que cuentes con mi - conmigo.  
T: Good. Quiero que cuentes conmigo.  Good. I want you to count on me . Quiero que cuentes 
conmigo . Very good. So, we said that sometimes, between English and Spanish,  that the 
prepositions might change, we say to count on in English and in Spanish to count with . We also 
spoke about how we can use the negative language transfer of Spanish speakers speaking English, 
that may make some mistake and we can make certain assu mptions about Spanish through that. 
So, maybe we hear a native Spanish speaker speaking English, saying you can count with me , and 
if we hear that a couple of times we can understand that that’s probably how it’s said in Spanish.So, we can take advantage of any negative language transfer we may hear from Spanish speakers 
in English. What was to wait or to hope ?  
S: Esperar .  
T: Esperar . So, if you say I hope that , then of course you will also follow this up with our mood 
tense. So, how would you say I hope that you count on me  (informally )?  
S: Espero que cuentes conmigo.  
T: Good. Espero que cuentes conmigo . I hope that you count on me.  Good. How would you say We 
hope that they count on Maria ? We hope that they count on Maria :  
S: Esperamos que c uenten con Mar ía.  
T: Good. Esperamos que cuenten con Mar ía. We hope that they count on Maria. What if you wanted 
to say we hope that they tell Maria it , using contar ? So now we’re using contar , to count , like to 
recount , we hope that they r ecount it to Maria , we hope that they tell it to Maria :  
S: Esperamos que lo cuenten a Mar ía.  
T: Very good. Esperamos que lo cuenten a Mar ía. So, here we have the other meaning of contar , 
to recount, to tell . What was to see ?  
S: Ver.  
T: Ver. So, if we say, for example, we hope that they see Maria , what is they see  in the present?  
S: Ven.  
T: Ven. Now, if you want to make the mood tense and you switch to the other side you would get 
“van”, which would probably cause, especially in the optiona l uses of the mood tense, a lot of 
confusion, because “van” sounds like -  
S: Like they are going .  
T: Yes, so, we actually build the mood tense on the I form, which was the only irregular form of ver 
in the present. Do you remember how to say I see ?  
S: Veo.T: Veo. So, we kept the e. So, the mood tense is based on this version to avoid any ambiguity that 
might be caused with va, vas, van. So, how would you say I hope that they see,  I hope that they 
see:  
S: Espero que vean.  
T: Good. Espero que vean . Now,  if you want to say I hope that they see Maria , we will say a María . 
Now the literal translation doesn’t make any sense: I hope that they see to Maria . In Spanish we 
have this personal a, that we use when we are referring to somebody that we are doing  the action 
of the verb to. So, in this case the person that we are doing the action of seeing  to, espero que 
vean a María . The reason for this is that the order in Spanish is quite flexible, words like María  
can come before the verb or after th e verb, which might cause confusion about whether Maria is 
doing or being done to, whether David  is doing or being done to. So, when it’s being done to, we 
include this a, and when there is not any other preposition there that shows us that we are doing it  
to, so we saw already, for example, contar con María , there we don’t need the a, but if there is 
no other preposition we will have to put that a. So, let’s practice this. What is to understand ?  
S: Comprender .  
T: Comprender . So, how would you say,  I hope that you , speaking informally, I hope that you 
understand David ? David. I hope that you understand David:   
S: Espero que comprendas a David .  
T: Good. Espero que comprendas a David . How would you say the same sentence speaking 
formally? I hope t hat you , formally, I hope that you understand David :  
S: Espero que comprenda a David.  
T: Good. Espero que comprenda a David . Now, we can see why this a is important, because if it 
weren’t there, if we were to say espero que comprenda David , it would soun d like I hope that 
David understands , because David is flexible: espero que David comprenda , espero que 
comprenda David  would both mean I hope that David understands . So, to make it clear, this habit 
formed in Spanish of putting the a there. For example, t he word for man was? Begins with a silent 
h.  
S: Hombre .T: Hombre . The man :  
S: El hombre.  
T: El hombre . If you say to the man , “a el hombre ”, a and el, they stick together and they form al, 
and it’s written like this : a-l, al hombre . So, if you were to  say I want him to see the man, I want 
that he sees the man, I want that he sees to the man , so how would that be?  
S: Quiero que va -  
T: We go from veo, to avoid that ambiguity.  
S: Vea. Quiero que vea al hombre.  
T: Good. Quiero que vea al hombre . But if  you were to say: I want the man to see, I want that the 
man sees :  
S: Quiero que el hombre vea.  
T: Quiero que el hombre vea . Or quiero que vea el hombre . So, because the order is flexible, we 
can’t just put el hombre  afterwards and understand from that I want that he sees the man . If we 
put el hombre afterwards we will still understand I want that the man sees . So, we need to say al 
hombre . What was I like, it pleases me ?  
S: Me gusta.  
T: Me gusta . So, you could say I like that the teacher visits , and here we will use the mood tense after 
I like that , because again you are casting your subjectivity onto the world and you show that with 
this mood tense. I like that the teacher visits . The teacher , we say the professor , so how is that?  
S: El profeso r.  
T: Good, or for female, for feminine?  
S: La profesora.  
T: Very good. So, either one. I like that the teacher visits :  
S: Me gusta que la profesora visite .T: Very good. Me gusta que la profesora visite  or me gusta que visite la profesora , the or der is 
flexible. Now, if you wanted to say I like that she visits the teacher , how would that be?  
S: Me gusta que visite la profesora.  
T: So I still understand from this sentence: I like that the teacher visits , because the order, the word 
order is not c hanging the information for us, because the word order is flexible. So, me gusta que 
visite la profesora , I like that the teacher visits . But, if we want to make it understood I like that 
he visits the teacher , how are we going to clear that up?  
S: Me gus ta que visite a la profesora.  
T: Good. Me gusta que visite a la profesora . Very good. So, to clarify, it’s not just when there might 
be some ambiguity that we have to use this personal a, we always need to use this a when the 
human that we mention is havi ng the action of the verb done to them and there is no other 
preposition present. Now, I say the human, not a human, because it’s when we refer to a specific 
person, and whilst this personal a is generally used with humans, we might also see it as a way of  
personifying non -humans, so some people use it with pets, for example, or it can be used in some 
creative ways, for example, a la muerte , escapar a la muerte , to escape death, and using this 
personal a in this expression personifies death, but generally s peaking, we will use it with humans, 
and with specific humans, when we are referring to a specific person. So, for example, I need to 
find the plumber – there we would use the personal a, I need to find a  plumber – there we wouldn’t. 
So, it’s important to listen out for it and to analyze, when you hear it, to understand why it was 
used, and this is the way we internalize this kind of quite specific details that we find in language. 
And the reason why I keep stressing the importance of listening is to practi ce this thinking process, 
to practice analyzing the language and becoming our own teachers. This is how language becomes 
something fascinating and pleasant to learn instead of frustrating and painful.