Track 72  
T: Another place where we use this mood tens e is when we are giving orders to each other, most of 
the time, with just one exception which we will look at, we are using this mood tense to give 
orders. For example, if you wanted to say informally don’t speak , you will just say you don’t speak , 
but you  will put it in this mood tense. So, how would you say that, don’t speak ?  
S: No hables.  
T: No hables . Good. Don’t speak. No hables . How would you say don’t stay,  don’t stay , still speaking 
informally, so you need to say you don’t stay , and then you jus t switch the ending. So, let’s build 
it up together, how do you say you don’t stay ?  
S: No te quedas.  
T: No te quedas . So, this is you don’t stay . But, if you want to make this don’t stay , then you will use 
this mood tense.  
S: No te quedes.  
T: No te q uedes . And then it sounds like Don’t stay! No te quedes. Don’t stay here :  
S: No te quedes aquí.  
T: Good. No te quedes aquí . The word for there  is ahí, ahí, spelled a-h-í, and there also exists allí, 
spelled with double l, there’s a tiny, even imperceivable difference between ahí a-h-í and allí a-l-
l-i. How would you say don’t stay there , informally ?  
S: No te quedes ahí.  
T: Good. No te quedes ahí . Good. How would you say don’t give it , speaking informally ? Don't give 
it:  
S: No de s… No lo des.  
T: No lo des . Don’t give it to him :  
S: No lo des a él.T: Now, if you put a él it’s going to be for clarification purposes, in which case it will be a repetition 
of something else.  
S: No se lo des.  
T: No se lo des . Good. No se lo des . Don't give it to him.  What if you wanted to show, clarify or 
emphasize that it’s to him ?  
S: No se lo des a él.  
T: Good. No se lo des a él . What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . Now, speaking to more than one person, how would you say : Eat! How would y ou tell 
more than one person to eat?  
S: Coman .  
T: Coman . Good. So, how would you say : Wait! , talking to more than one person?  
S: Esperen .  
T: Good. Esperen . Now, if you want to say Wait for me , we know already we don’t use for, we just 
say me, me. With positive commands, when you’re telling somebody to do something rather than 
not to do something, we have these little words like me or lo, breaking the rules that we learned 
so far about their position – they will come after the changed verb, only w ith positive commands . 
This helps our ear tune into the fact that it’s a command. Because other than that  vowel changing, 
which is a very small change which might be quite hard to pick up audibly, we also have these 
small little words like me or lo coming after the verb and that also helps our ear tune into the fact 
that it’s a command. So, if you want to say to this more than one person, to this plural you, wait 
for me, await me , how will it sound?  
S: Espérenme .  
T: Espérenme . Good. And it’s writt en like one word as well. Espérenme . How would you say wait 
for it , or wait for him , still to more than one person?  
S: Espérenlo .T: Espérenlo . Wait for them :  
S: Espérenlos .  
T: Espérenlos . But, if you were to say don’t wait for them , then we don’t have  it on the end, this is a 
negative command. So, don’t wait for them , still to more than one person:  
S: No los esperen.  
T: Very good. No los esperen . How would you say, speaking formally, eat:  
S: Coma .  
T: Coma . Good. Eat it :  
S: Cómalo .  
T: Cómalo . Good , so we have the lo on the end, but if you were to say don’t eat it , still speaking 
formally:  
S: No lo coma.  
T: Good. No lo coma.  And speaking informally?  
S: No lo comas.  
T: No lo comas . And speaking to more than one person?  
S: No lo coman.  
T: No lo coman . But, if we wanted to say eat it , speaking to more than one person, positive command, 
eat it :  
S: Cómanlo .  
T: Cómanlo . Very good. To forget was olvidar , olvidar .  
S: Olvidar .  
T: Olvidar . Related to oblivion  in English actually, oblivion  means like a state of complete forgetting, 
so we can see the connection there between oblivion  and olvidar . Olvidar  – to forget . Or 
olvidarse , either, it can be either because olvidar  is a verb where we need to say what is beingforgotten, we need to say it, so if we  use it we have no problem, lo olvido , but if we want to just 
say I forget , then we have a problem, because we are not saying what , so we need to say I forget 
myself,  me olvido , so it’s a verb that doesn’t like to be alone. So, how would you say forget it , 
speaking formally, forget it :  
S: Olvídelo .  
T: Olvídelo . Good. Now, if you just want to say forget , and we don’t want to say it, this verb 
doesn’t like to be alone, so there we would say forget yourself , so how would this be, still 
formally:  
S: Olvídese .  
T: Very good. Olvídese . How would you say don’t forget it , speaking informally, don’t forget it ?  
S: No lo olvides.  
T: Good. No lo olvides . But, if we don’t want to put the lo, we can just say don't forget yourself , don’t 
forget , so how would that be ?  
S: No te olvides.  
T: Good. No te olvides.  Or we could do both, we could say no te lo olvides , we could put both, no 
te lo olvides . How would you say to more than one person don’t forget, you guys don’t forget ?  
S: No se olviden.  
T: Good. No se olvid en. Don’t forget it , still to plural:  
S: No lo olviden.  
T: No lo olviden . Good. Or no se lo olviden , you could put them both, meaning doesn’t really change. 
How would you say let’s not forget it , how do you think that would be ? Let’s not forget i t:  
S: No lo olvidemos.  
T: Good. No lo olvidemos. No lo olvidemos . But if you didn’t want to say it, and you just wanted to 
say let’s not forget , how would you say it?  
S: No nos olvidemos.T: No nos olvidemos . Good. What was to buy ?  
S: Comprar .  
T: Comprar . How would you say, to more than one person, buy what is missing, what lacks, what is 
necessary ? So, what was this missing, lacks, necessary  verb?  
S: Faltar .  
T: Good. Faltar . So, speaking to more than one person , buy what is missing, what is ne cessary, what 
lacks :  
S: Compren que - que lo.  
T: Lo que.  
S: Compren lo que falta.  
T: Good. Compren lo que falta . You could also say compren lo que hace falta , buy what is making 
lack, you will hear that as well. So, we are using the mood tense to make c ommands, with one 
exception. The one exception is with positive informal commands. So, what that means is when 
we are speaking informally and we are telling somebody to do something, rather than not to do 
something. The reason why we don’t use the mood ten se here is because we want a shortcut, it’s 
what we do most, to tell people informally what to do. If you think about it, all day you are saying 
wait here, buy this, call me later, do that and the other , it’s such common speech that it seemed a 
bit heavy t o use the mood tense for this. So, Spanish took a shortcut, and the shortcut is just 
dropping the s of the you form of the verb . So, for example, we have comprar , to buy . You buy , 
informally, is:  
S: Compras .  
T: Compras . Now, to make the order, the po sitive order, we just drop the s and we get:  
S: Compra .  
T: Compra .  
S: Which is the same as the he/she/it -T: It’s the same as the he/she/it  form, but it will never cause really any ambiguity for two reasons. 
Firstly, your tone of voice when you are mak ing an order, the context is always very present, and 
also because we’ll be putting our small words, like lo, me, la, after the verb, with the positive 
orders at least, so it’s very obviously an order. But we want to think it through this way, that we 
are taking off the s, so we keep the association with you informal. So, we have to buy , comprar ; 
you buy , informally, compras ; then we want to make an order, which is “get rid of the s”, and we 
say compra . How would you say buy it , talking informally ?  
S: Cómpralo .  
T: Cómpralo . Buy me it :  
S: Cómpramelo .  
T: Cómpramelo . Good. What was to forget ?  
S: Olvidar .  
T: Olvidar . How would you say forget it , talking informally ?  
S: Olvida .  
T: Good, but we need to say what we are forgetting with this on e.  
S: Olvídalo .  
T: Olvídalo . And if we don’t want to say the lo, we can say:  
S: Olvídate .  
T: Olvídate . Good. What was to eat ?  
S: Comer .  
T: Comer . Let’s say eat it , informally:  
S: Cómelo .  
T: Cómelo . Good. But, don’t eat it , still informally:  
S: No lo come.T: So, it’s just the positive commands that we have this shortcut, when we go to negative, we want to 
use the mood tense.  
S: No lo comas.  
T: No lo comas . Good. How would you say eat it , speaking formally? Formally:  
S: Cómalo .  
T: Cómalo . Goo d. Don’t eat it , still formally:  
S: No lo coma.  
T: No lo coma . Good. Eat it , speaking plurally, to more than one person, eat it :  
S: Cómanlo .  
T: Good. Cómanlo . Don’t eat it :  
S: No lo coman.  
T: No lo coman . Very good. What was to sell ?  
S: Vender .  
T: Vender . Sell it , speaking informally:  
S: Véndelo .  
T: Véndelo . Good. But, don’t sell it :  
S: No lo vendas.  
T: No lo vendas . So, our shortcut is dropping the s of the present for the positive commands, which 
are informal, it’s something that’s quite spe cific, positive commands informally, but it’s something 
that we do all day and that should help us remember that we have this shortcut for it. Callar , c-a-
l-l-a-r, callar , means to quiet , and callarse , callarse , means to shut up . So, how would you tell 
somebody to shut up , informally ?  
S: Cállate .  
T: Cállate . Good. Quiet yourself . Good.S: So is it as polite as be quiet , or is it really shut up ?  
T: No, it’s not very polite. If you were to speak to more than one person, how would you say it?  
S: “Cállente ”, sorry, cállense .  
T: Cállense , good, now we need the mood tense. Cállense . Very good.