Track 73  
T: So we’ve seen how with orders we want to use this mood tense, with the exception of positive 
orders which are informal. There we have a shortcut, we  can just cut off the s of the informal form. 
For example, what is to wait ?  
S: Esperar .  
T: And what is you wait , informally ?  
S: Esperas .  
T: Esperas . And wait, the order:  
S: Espera .  
T: Espera . That’s our shortcut. How would you say let’s wait?  
S: Esperemos .  
T: Esperemos . Good. And you can also say esperamos , it just sounds less like an order. It would 
sound more like shall we wait?  ¿Esperamos ? Shall we wait? But then the order, esperemos . Let’s 
not wait :  
S: No esperemos.  
T: No esperemos . Good . So orders, we are using with you, the different versions of you, and with we. 
But maybe I want to say what I want him to do, or what I want her to do, or what I want them  to 
do. Other than the structures that we learned already, quiero que , prefiero que , etc, we can just 
say que and follow it with the subjunctive. So for example, maybe you tell me David is waiting 
for you and I say que espere . Que espere . That he waits , but I’m using this mood tense so I’m 
saying let him wait . Let him wait . Que espere . Maybe I really want the show to finish. I want the 
show to hurry up and finish. I can say que, it finishes in the mood tense and then I get that meaning 
of let it finish. Hurry up and finish.  So how would I say that? Let it finish :  
S: Que termine.T: Que t ermine . Good. Que termine . We said that the word for already  was ya. And we can use that 
here, so let it finish already :  
S: Que termine ya.  
T: Que termine ya . Enough already.  We said that callarse  was to quiet oneself or to shut up . So 
maybe you want som ebody to shut up. You’re not angry enough to tell them directly. Maybe you 
will just say oh, let them, let him shut up. Let him quiet himself.  How would that be?  
S: Que se calle.  
T: Good. Que se calle . Another situation that we use the mood tense in, is when after the word 
cuando , we refer to the future. For example, if I say when we speak  and I mean generally, how 
will it sound?  
S: Cuando hablamos.  
T: Cuando hablamos . So this is generally, when we speak generally and you could continue, no?  
But, if yo u mean in a future event, when we speak later on , then you will use this mood tense. Now 
this is a very interesting use of the mood tense because it highlights some kind of superstition 
maybe that the language is uncomfortable with referring to something i n the future that didn’t 
happen yet as a fact. So you’re putting this mood tense there to kind of highlight that subjectivity. 
Give me when we speak then. When we speak , and we mean the future. When we speak :  
S: Cuando hablemos.  
T: Cuando hablemos . We ar e using this mood tense because we are referring to something that’s 
going to happen in the future that we give it as a fact. And it’s like who are we as mere mortals to 
do such a thing, to refer to this event or to this fact that will be. So for example, you could say 
when we eat together, we speak . And you mean generally. When we eat together, we speak . What 
was together ? Related to junction , related to joint? Related to what in English they say military  
junta .  
S: Junta .  
T: So how would you say when we eat together, we speak ? When we eat together, we speak :S: Cuando comemos junta.  
T: Junta  is the version you found through military junta , but you are not just going to take it, you are 
going to have to process it as well. When we eat together :  
S: Juntas .  
For two females, that’s fine. So cuando comemos juntas . We speak :  
S: Hablamos .  
T: Good. All together. When we eat together, we speak :  
S: Cuando comemos juntas , hablamos .  
T: Good. Cuando comemos juntas , hablamos . So here you’re speaking gener ally, generalmente , 
generally. When we eat together , we spea k, but if you want to say when we eat together  and you’re 
referring to the future. A fact that you’re naming that hasn’t happened yet, there you want to use 
your mood tense. So let’s work our way through it. When we eat together , and we’re referring to 
the future:  
S: Cuando comamos juntas.   
T: We will speak , and we don’t need will with we will speak because the when we eat together is a 
future context. We can just go back to normal everyday presen t again.  
S: Hablamos .  
T: Good. Cuando comamos juntas (two females) when we eat together , hablamos , we will speak . 
Now hablamos  is just normal present because it is not directly connected to cuando  and we have 
future context already so we can just use hablamos . So if we compare these two sentences, the 
only difference is in that mood tense. Cuando comemos juntos , hablamos . This means generally. 
I went back to male or mixed group. Cuando comemos juntos , hablamos , generally. Cuando 
comamos juntos , hablamo s. When we eat together, we will speak.  What is I go or I’m going ?  
S: Voy.T: Voy. Now you could probably guess that the mood tense of voy and va and vamos  is irregular. So 
the root is vaya , v-a-y-a, vaya . And then we add on our consonants if we need t hem, so for example 
the they form or the you plural form would be?  
S: Vayan .  
T: Vayan . We form:  
S: Vayamos .  
Vayamos . Good. So how would you say we see her when we go , and you’re speaking generally ?   
We see her :  
S: La vemos .  
T: La vemos . When we g o, generally speaking:  
S: Cuando vamos.   
T: Good. La vemos cuando vamos . But, if we want to say we will see her when we go , and we’re 
referring to the future, not generally. We will see her when we go . How will that be? So, we will 
see her , we can just us e the present because when we go is the future context. So, again how is we 
will see her ?  
S: La vemos .  
T: Good. When we go , and we refer now to the future with when we go :  
S: Cuando vayamos .  
T: Good. La vemos cuando vayamos . So, we have la vemos cuan do vamos  generally, la vemos 
cuando vayamos  in the future.