Track 74  
T: So we’ve been seeing the obligatory uses of the mood tense and we will continue to look at some 
of these uses. To choose is elegir . Elegir .  
S: Elegir .  
T: Which sounds a little bit l ike:  
S: Elect .  
T: Yes, elect. Related to elect . Election  in Spanish is elección . I choose from elegir  is elijo, elijo. So 
what happened there?  
S: The / e/ became /i/.  
T: Yes, the e or the / e/ sound became an i or an / i/ sound. So instead of splitting,  this e just turns into 
an i. And that happens sometimes in Spanish with a few verbs. When we stress the e, instead of 
splitting it will just turn into an i. So here we have elijo. And this just when we stress it. So how 
would you say we choose from elegir ?  
S: Elegimos .  
T: Elegimos . Good. So there the e is not turning into an i because we are not stressing it. Elegimos .  
But in the other places where we stress it, it will. So we have elijo. You, informal. You choose :  
S: Eliges .  
T: Eliges . Good. So how  would you say I don’t want you to choose for me ? Now when for means on 
my behalf, I don’t want you to choose for me, I don’t want you to choose on my behalf , the for that 
we use is por. But, maybe we don’t mean on my behalf . Maybe we mean I don ’t want you to 
choose something for me . Literally something that is for me . So, in that case we would use para . 
But, let’s make the sentence like on my behalf . I don’t want you to choose for me. I don’t want you 
to choose on my behalf , speaking informally:   
S: No quiero que elijas por mí.T: Very good. No quiero que elijas por mí. Good. So por mí is like on my behalf. I don’t want you 
to take my decisions.  No quiero que elijas por mí. To break  was romper , or romperse  if we say 
something breaks wit hout saying who breaks it. We said that romper  was related to rapture  in 
English, which also means it’s related to corrupt . The -rupt of corrupt  is rupture , disrupt , erupt .  
So romper  is to break . How would you say I don’t want it to break ? I don’t want it to break :  
S: No quiero que rompa.  
T: If you say no quiero que rompa  I’m waiting to hear what you don’t want it to break.  
S: Lo rompa , ah, not lo rompa -  
T: That would be a different sentence -  
S: Se rompa .  
T: Good. If you were to say no quiero que l o rompa , it would mean I don’t want him or her to break 
it, or you (formal) to break it. If you say no quiero que se rompa , we are not saying who. We are 
just saying I don’t want it to break . I don’t want it to break itself , even though we don’t literally 
mean itself . We said that we can use para , for, para . We can use para  like to, when it’s in order 
to. So when we have a to in English  which implies in order to , we should put para  in Spanish. 
What was to find ?  
S: Encontrar .  
T: Encontrar . Encontrarse , encontrarse , to find oneself , is to meet up . To meet up . So how would 
you say we have met up or we have found ourselves or each other , which is the same word in 
Spanish ?  
S: Hemos. Nos hemos encontrado .  
T: Good. Nos hemos encontrado . We have met up . So we have met up in order to speak. We have 
met up to speak. We have met up in order to speak :  
S: So, nos hemos encontrado para hablar .  
T: Good. Nos hemos encontrado para hablar . Good. So we have met up to speak . And, although 
we wouldn’t say in order to s peak  usually in English , if that to speak implies in order to speakthen we will put para  in Spanish. Nos hemos encontrado para hablar . But after para que , so 
that, para que , you must use the mood tense. We have cooked in order that they eat. We have 
cook ed so they eat :  
S: Hemos cocinado para que coman .  
T: Good. Hemos cocinado para que coman . Good. We have cooked so that they eat . And you can’t 
make the shortcut there, of para comer , hemos cocinado para comer , because of course it would 
just sound like we have cooked in order to eat , in order for us to eat . Good. To go back  or to return  
is volver . Volver .  
S: Volver .  
T: Volver , like in revolve . The -volve  of revolve  is volver  and exists in Spanish, revolver . But in 
Spanish, revolver  means to stir. Revolv er. So volver  is to return  or to go back or to come back .  
How do you think you would say I return ? I come back or go back :  
S: Volvo. Vuelvo.  
T: Vuelvo . Good. The o splits. Vuelvo . How would you say you come back or you go back , speaking 
informally ?  
S: Vuevles .  
T: Volver . Take it slowly.  
S: Vuelves .  
T: Good. Vuelves . Now if you say so that you come back, in order for you to come back, so that you 
come back :  
S: Para que vuelvas.   
T: Good. Para que vuelvas . So you could say something like I’ve done  it so that you come back. I’ve 
done it so that you come back . So I have done : the version of hacer  after haber , after any version 
of haber  is hecho . It’s very irregular. And we said that hecho , the version of hacer  after haber , 
also means fact. So I have done , how is it? I have done :  
S: He hecho.T: Good. I have done it so that you come back , informally:  
S: Lo he hecho para que vuelvas.  
T: Good. Lo he hecho para que vuelvas . How would you say I have done it so that they come back ?  
S: Lo he hecho par a que vuelvan.  
T: Good. Le he hecho para que vuelvan . Good. How would you say they have done it so that we 
come back ? They have done it so that we come back :  
S: Lo han hecho para que volvamos .  
T: Good. Lo han hecho para que volvamos . They have do ne it so that we come back . And I should 
mention that you might hear para  shortened down in Spanish to pa. So para que would sound 
like pa que , pa que volvamos . How much this happens or if it happens at all depends on dialect. 
So you will notice it if you hear pa, it’s just para . What was the word for so, like in so tired ?  
S: Tan.  
T: Tan. And también,  t-a-m-b-i-e-n is as well , also. And it actually has tan inside there. The n turned 
to an m because of that b, it softened it. So we have tan and t hen bien. También . Just like in 
English as well . Tan, other than so, can also be translated as as in certain circumstances and then 
well, from  as well , bien. So interestingly they are like direct translations of each other. Even though 
if you think ab out it the direct translation doesn’t make any sense : as well . But it’s the same in 
English and Spanish. As well , también . So how would you say so that you too, so that you as well 
come back,  and let’s speak informally ?  
S: Para que tú también vuelvas .  
T: Good. Para que tú también vuelvas or para que vuelvas tú también . So how would you say we 
have done everything, we have done everything, so that you also come back ? We have done 
everything so that you also come back :  
S: Hemos hecho todo para que tú t ambién vuelvas .  
T: Good. Very good. Hemos hecho todo para que tú también vuelvas . Very good.