Track 77  
T: How would you say there should be something to eat ? There should be something to eat - so, we 
said that should  was would owe or would must , so what is to owe , which we can use like must  and 
it’s related to  debt?  
S: Deber .  
T: Deber . And would must or would owe gives us the meaning should .  
S: Debería .  
T: Good. There should be something to eat :  
S: Debería haber.   
T: Good. Your first place your mind is going to go is to choose between ser and estar . If neither fit, 
make that little check, “oh, is this exist? Is this the be that means exist?” And then you know it’s 
haber . So, there should be, there should exist something to eat :  
S: Debería haber algo comer - para comer.  
T: Good, in order to ea t, there should be something in order to eat , good. Debería haber algo para 
comer , there should be something to eat . Very good. Another common place that we use the mood 
tense in Spanish, is when we say it is, an adjective, que, and then a verb. This ve rb is going to go 
into the mood tense, you are noticing that que has a lot to do with the subjunctive, that this que 
introduces the mood tense in many cases. So, for example, if I want to give you some advice and 
tell you it’s terrible that you eat this, i t is terrible that you eat this . So, let’s speak informally:  
S: Es terrible que comas esto.  
T: Good. Es terrible que comas esto . Good. So, it’s the que, the combination of es terrible and que, 
which introduces this mood tense . If you say it is terri ble if you eat this , then you don’t use the 
mood tense. So, how would you say that? It is terrible if you eat this , still speaking informally:  
S: Es terrible si comes esto.  
T: Good. Es terrible si comes esto . How would you say it is possible ?S: Es po sible.  
T: Good. How would you say It’s possible that we go later ? What is later , or more late ?  
S: Más tarde.  
T: Good. And what is the root for the mood tense of go? Voy, va becomes:  
S: Vaya .  
T: Good. So, it is possible that we go later :  
S: Es posib le que vayamos más tarde.  
T: Good. Es posible que vayamos más tarde . Fuerte  in Spanish means strong , but it’s also used 
colloquially and maybe the closest translation that I can think of would be something like, I mean, 
again it’s very colloquial, but you  can say oh, that’s hardcore, that’s full -on, in Spanish you say a 
lot qué fuerte , qué fuerte , how heavy, how hardcore, how full -on, qué fuerte . And we see that 
we can use qué like how – qué fuerte ; qué lindo , how nice, how beautifu l; qué bueno , how good. 
You can say qué increíble que  or qué fuerte que , so, whilst we have two que’s there in Spanish, 
this is just how incredible that, how hardcore that , and, of course, we will carry on into the mood 
tense. So, how strong, h ow heavy, that he is here , how would you say that?  
S: Qué fuerte que esté aquí.  
T: Good. Qué fuerte que esté aquí . In English we achieve a similar feeling to what we get with the 
Spanish subjunctive sometimes with words like should  or might . Here for example, in English we 
could say how incredible that he should come , here we don’t mean should , like in its literal 
meaning like debería , no, here in English we are using should  to give this kind of mood tense 
feeling: how incredible that he sh ould come . Está bien , está bien , means it’s okay. The literal 
translation of bien is well, and to be well is a state, so it goes with estar : está bien , but it can also 
be used like it’s okay . So for example, you could say, you know, it’s okay that you  ask but I don’t 
have to reply . So, to ask is preguntar , and to reply or to respond is responder . So, we will say 
it’s okay that you ask, but it’s not necessary that I respond, I don’t need to respond, it’s not 
necessary that I respond . So, the first bit – it’s okay that you ask , and we are speaking informally, 
and to ask  was preguntar :S: Está bien que preguntes.  
T: Good. Está bien que preguntes . So, it’s like okay, you can ask as much as you like , so this is the 
feeling we get here with the mood tense, or in English we might use might  here to get this kind of 
mood tense feeling: it’s okay that you might ask. But :  
S: Pero .  
T: It’s not necessary that I respond, I don’t need to respond, it’s not necessary that I respond , there's 
a few ways we can say this :  
S: No es necesito.  
T: Necesito  is the verb.  
S: Necesidad ?  
T: Is necessity . So, necessary . How is vocabulary  in Spanish?  
S: Ah , wait, necesario .  
T: Good. So, it’s not necessary that I respond :  
S: No es necesario que responda.  
T: Very good. Está bien que preguntes , pero no es necesario que responda . And there we have 
the mood tense after es necesario , or no es necesario que , so we have it is, adjective, que, and 
then the verb, and that verb with the mood tense. We also could have said no hace falta que 
responda , it doesn’t make lack , this common expression we said that we will hear around, hacer 
falta , no hace falta que responda . How would you say it is important that we find it soon ? It’s 
important that we find it soon :  
S: Es impo rtante que lo encontremos pronto.  
T: Good. Es importante que lo encontremos pronto . Good.