Track 78  
T: What was to follow or to continue, to carry on ?  
S: Seguir .  
T: Seguir . And how was I continue or I carry on or I follow ?  
S: Sigo.  
T: Sigo. Good.  If you want to say I continue speaking,  here we use the -ing, I continue speaking , so 
how would that be?  
S: Sigo hablando.  
T: Sigo hablando . He continues speaking :  
S: Sigue hablando.  
T: Sigue hablando . He continues speaking, she continues speaking, yo u (formal ) continue speaking. 
It’s probable that he continues speaking . So, in English we will probably say he’ll probably 
continue speaking , but in Spanish it is probable that he continues speaking . So, how would that 
be?  
S: Es probable que siga habl ando.  
T: Very good. Es probable que siga hablando . Good. It is probable that he continues speaking. So, 
after seguir to get the meaning of continue we can use the -ing. What was to be for characteristics?  
S: Ser.  
T: Ser. Good. How would you make the -ing form of ser?  
S: Siendo .  
T: Siendo . Free, in the sense of not requiring any money, is gratis  in Spanish.  
S: Gratis .T: This is where we get gratuitous  from in English. It’s a bit gratuitous, it’s unnecessary, it’s free, it’s 
extra. Gratis . So, you can  say it’s imperative that it continues to be free . So, it’s imperative that it 
continues being free , how would you say that?  
S: Es imperativo que siga siendo gratis.  
T: Good. Es imperativo que siga siendo gratis . To start , we said that we had comenzar  and 
empezar . Comenzar  is, of course, easier to remember and use, because it sound s like commence , 
but empezar  is probably more common. So, you can use whichever you like now. How would you 
say it’s spectacular that they start to speak Spanish ? Now, aft er start, to connect to the next to 
form you need a. There are just a handful of verbs that are not verbs of movement, for example, 
like ir, volver , salir, that need a to connect, apart from these there are just a handful of verbs that 
use some preposition  to connect, and empezar  and comenzar  are two of them. So, how would 
you say it’s spectacular that they begin to speak Spanish (spectacular  is the same word in 
Spanish )?  
S: Es “spectacular ”,  
T: Almost the same word.  
S: Oh, right, espectacular .  
T: Go od, es espectacular , that they begin :  
S: Que comienzen a hablar español.  
T: Good. Es espectacular que comienzen a hablar español . It's spectacular that they start to speak 
Spanish . Now, after comenzar  and empezar  you could also put the -ing form, and the  meaning 
would change a little, it would mean it’s spectacular that they start out speaking Spanish . Now, in 
English there is not a lot of difference, that they begin to speak Spanish, that they begin speaking 
Spanish , both in English mean to start speakin g Spanish. But in Spanish, if you use the -ing here 
it would mean that they start out speaking Spanish, like right from the beginning . So, when I’m 
speaking about these courses for example, I say that we start out speaking Spanish, right from the 
begin ning. Now , speaking about that in Spanish I would use the -ing here. So, it’s spectacular that 
they start out speaking Spanish :  
S: Es espectacular que comienzen hablando español.T: Good. And here we don’t need the a, because we are not connecting t o a to form. What was the 
verb to finish or to terminate ?  
S: Terminar .  
T: Terminar . Now, if you want to say a sentence like I want you guys to speak with me when you 
finish selling them , we will say when you finish to sell them . Here you won’t u se the -ing, but to 
finish , terminar , is also one of those verbs that needs a preposition to connect to the next to form . 
In this case the preposition is de. So, to finish selling them is terminar de vender . So, I want you 
guys to speak with me when y ou finish selling them , so the first bit is I want you guys to speak with 
me, how is that bit?  
S: Quiero que hablen conmigo.  
T: Good, mood tense, quiero que hablen conmigo . Good. I want that you talk with me, quiero que 
hablen conmigo , when you finish se lling them . So, when you finish , and we are still speaking to 
you guys:  
S: Cuando terminen,  
T: Good, why did you use the mood tense there – cuando terminen ?  
S: Because it’s the future when .  
T: Good. When cuando  refers to generally , we won’t use the  mood tense, we just use the present, 
and here, referring to a future event that hasn’t happened, after cuando , we use the mood tense, 
well remembered. Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen , when you finish selling them , 
and we are not going to use selling, we are going to use to sell , and we connect that with de:  
S: Cuando terminen de venderlos.  
T: Good, so altogether – I want you guys to speak with me when you finish selling them :  
S: Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen de venderlos.  
T: Good.  Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen de venderlos . So this means I want you 
guys to speak with me when you finish selling them , but terminar  we can also use like end up : I 
want you guys to speak with me when you end up selling them . So, using the -ing form afterterminar , instead of de and the to form, gives us this meaning of “end up”. So, if you wanted to 
say, I want you guys to speak with me when you end up selling them , so I want you guys to speak 
with me :  
S: Quiero que hablen conmigo.  
T: When y ou end up selling them , so we will say when you finish and then we will actually use the -ing:  
S: Cuando terminen vendiéndolos.  
T: Good. Quiero que hablen conmigo cuando terminen vendiéndolos . I want you guys to speak 
with me when you end up selling them . So, there is a difference here, depending on whether we 
use the to form or the -ing form, just as we saw with empezar  or comenzar , there can be a 
difference between using the to form afterwards or the -ing form afterwards, and both of them need 
a preposi tion to join the to form, which might be a clue to you that there is a difference between 
using the to form and then the -ing form. If the to form is joining with a preposition, then maybe 
this particular verb takes the -ing form afterwards as well with a slightly different meaning. 
Empezar a hablar , to start to speak , to start speaking ; empezar hablando , to actually begin 
something speaking , or, as we would probably say, to start out speaking ; terminar de vender , to 
finish selling ; terminar vendiendo , to end up selling . So, what we have aimed to teach here is the 
idea of the mood tense, the general feeling of the mood tense, and the kind of constructions in 
which it occurs, and, like I said, understanding the mood tense is about listening out for it, and 
listening out for how people around you use it. A great way to learn it is to chat online, for example, 
because maybe in real life, and almost certainly at the beginning, you won’t pick up those subtle 
changes in vowels that you get with the mood tense. But if you are chatting online you will notice 
quite clearly, “ah, there they used an a and not an e, or there they used an e and not an a, oh why?” 
And then you will look at the context of the sentence and work out why the mood tense was used 
and that really is the best way to internalize it.