Track 79  
T: So let’s make a little re cap of some of the situations in which we are using the mood tense with a 
new verb, dejar . Dejar . Dejar  means to leave , but in the sense of to leave a message , rather than 
leave , to go out like salir . Dejar .  
S: Dejar .  
T: Dejar . Good. How would you say leave me a message , speaking formally? A message is un 
mensaje . Un mensaje.  
S: Déjeme un mensaje.  
T: Good. Déjeme un mensaje . And, of course, positive command, we have the me, me, after the 
verb, déjeme un mensaje . How would you say I want you to leave me a message , speaking 
informally? I want you to leave me a message :  
S: Quiero que me dejes un mensaje.  
T: Good. Quiero que me dejes un mensaje . In the same way, if you were to say I want to tell him to 
leave me a message , you won’t say I want to tell him to leave me a message  literally, you will say 
I want to tell him that he leaves me a message . What is to say or to tell ?  
S: Decir .  
T: Decir . Good, so, I want to tell him  is the f irst bit.  
S: Quiero decirle.  
T: That he leaves me a message :  
S: Que deje - me deje un mensaje.  
T: Good. Quiero decirle que me deje un mensaje . So, you don’t want to tell him that he is leaving 
you a message, you want to tell him to leave you a message, so here we use the mood tense. If you 
were to say quiero decirle que me deja un mensaje  what would be understood there without the 
mood tense is I want to tell him that he, she , or you ( formal)  is leaving me a message , but if youuse here your mood tense, then it’s understood there that sense of order, and you will understand 
I want to tell him to leave me a message , quiero decirle que me deje un mensaje . Good.  
When he leaves you the message, call me  (let’s speak informally) ; when he leaves you the messag e, 
call me :  
S: Cuando te deje el mensaje.  
T: Good. Cuando te deje el mensaje , call me , informally, so, it’s our shortcut.  
S: Llámame .  
T: Good. Cuando te deje el mensaje , or cuando él te deje el mensaje , if you wanted to clarify, 
llámame . Good. So, afte r cuando , when we are referring to the future, when we are referring to 
something that hasn’t happened yet, we feel a bit superstitious about it and we want to use our 
mood tense. Cuando te deje el mensaje , llámame . It’s essential  that he sees my message.  It is 
essential - the -tial here, what do you think might happen to it in Spanish? Like the -tion, like in 
tradition , becomes:  
S: Tradición .  
T: So, something similar might happen here.  
S: Esencial .  
T: Well done, esencial . Spacial  - espacial , good. So, it’s essential that he sees my message :  
S: Es esencial que.  
T: He sees my message , it’s based on the irregularity of veo, the I version:  
S: Vea.  
T: Good. So, it’s essential that he, or she, or you ( formal)  see my message :  
S: Es ese ncial que vea mi mensaje.  
T: Good. Es esencial que vea mi mensaje . Good. Ojalá  in Spanish means something like hopefully . 
Ojalá .  
S: Ojalá .T: You will hear it a lot, ojalá , and there are a lot of versions of the history of where it came from . 
What it’s definitely got something to do with is “Allah”, the Arabic word for God, or the god , 
Allah, and the south of Spain was part of the Muslim world for around eight centuries, so we have 
a lot of Arabic words and structures and habits in Spani sh, and one of them is this popular 
expression ojalá . And there are a lot of versions of where it came from exactly, although my 
favorite is that it’s a contraction of “ojo -Allah”, ojo means eye, and it’s still used in some places, 
like watch out!  Ojo! Careful, watch it, beware , so it’s like “ojo -Allah”, so you say it when you 
want something, “ojo -Allah” , I want this , ojalá , hopefully. Although that’s just one version of 
where ojalá  came from. So, after ojalá  you can use the mood tense to say what you wa nt to happen, 
so, you can say for example, hopefully she will leave a message , or she leaves a message , using 
your mood tense . Hopefully she leaves a message :  
S: Ojalá deje un mensaje.  
T: Good, ojalá deje un mensaje . How would you say hopeful ly it will be soon ? When something 
happens is a characteristic of it, so if you want to say hopefully it ’s soon , we need to use that 
irregular root of ser that we have in the mood tense, do you remember how that is, and it’s like the 
popular expression t hat we have in Spanish, that you might hear a lot, which begins o.  
S: O sea.  
T: Good. Hopefully it is soon, hopefully it will be soon :  
S: Ojalá sea pronto.  
T: Good. Ojalá sea pronto . Good. So, ojalá  you will hear and want to use very often, and also yo u 
use with this subjective tense. So, like we said, you just want to listen out for when the mood tense 
is used, get interested in it, analyze why it’s been used, think about why it’s been used, think about 
how that fits in to the image and the vision that  you are getting of the mood tense and how and 
why it’s used. It’s something that you should enjoy and analyze and the most interesting areas 
might be the optional uses, because with the optional uses of the mood tense you can really give 
many different to nes to what you are saying, whether it’s humor, or sarcasm, or sincerity, irritation 
– there is a whole spectrum of feelings you can express with it. And these are best understood 
explored in a live environment – practicing, listening to and analyzing Span ish.