Track 8  
T: What was again the word th en for it or for him or for you (formal)?  
S: Lo.  
T: Lo. If we make this feminine, so we change the o to an a, and we're going to see other examples 
of this way of making something feminine in Spanish, we get la. And this means her, it (a feminine 
thing), so objects as well. Well, not objects. Objects don't have gender. When people speak about 
languages that have gender, they tend to think that the object has the gender. But it's not the object, 
it's the word.  
You might  have two words for the same obj ect, and one might be masculine and one might be 
feminine. So it's the word. A feminine word for example usually are ones that end in a. So like 
casa, casa,  house. If you want to say I want to see it , and with this it you mean the house. What 
do you thin k you will say? I want to see it:   
S: Quiero verla.   
T: Good. Quiero verla.  Now what else could that sentence mean, other than I want to see it  (the 
feminine thing)? what else could it mean?  
S: Oh. It could also mean I want to see her .  
T: Yes, exactly. S o we get quite a few meanings just with this little lo and adding an  s to it or changing 
the o to an a. We actually get a lot of options. La could mean her, and it also could mean you 
(formal ) talking to a female. So you could be saying I want to see y ou, formally. Now, where you 
use the formal language and the informal language really, really depends on the dialect. So the safe 
way is to go in with the formal and to see what happens and to see how people address you and 
see how people address each othe r in this context, and you can adjust accordingly. For example, 
in Spain, when you meet somebody, when you're going to a shop, when you meet somebody for 
the first time - with the exception of kind of young peers - the common thing is to begin spea king 
formally. If I compare this to Buenos Aires, for example, in Argentina, it's almost never used, this 
formal way of addressing people. In fact, it's used more often to insult somebody with an extralayer of sarcasm or irony, than say, than it's actuall y used sincerely to be formal. So it really 
depends on the place. You want to go and see.  
But to play safe, you can use the formal, which will be lo or la, speaking to a male or to a female.  
Lo and la instead of te.  
Quiere  means he wants , she wants , it wants  or you (formal) want . We can see that these four, they 
band together. Not just in words like lo and la, but in the verbs as well. We saw it with es, that es 
means it is, she is , he is, you (formal) are. So they will band together. Quiere  means he wants, she 
wants , it wants , you (formal) want . So, how would you say you want to visit me ?  
S: Quiere visitarme.   
T: Good. Quiere visitarme . You want to visit me . Now if you want to make that a question, in English, 
you put do, do you want ?  But in Spanish,  you won't do anything like that. In Spanish, you will 
just make it sound like a question with your voice. So, how would you say Do you want to visit 
me?:  
S: ¿Quiere visitarme?   
T: Good. ¿Quiere visitarme?  How would you say You don't want to visit me ?  
S: No quiere visitarme.   
T: You sounded very sad when you said that. No quiere visitarme.  Now if you want to say Don't you 
want to visit me ? Again, English gets really complicated there. But not Spanish. So, don't you want 
to visit me ?:  
S: ¿No quiere visita rme?   
T: Good. ¿No quiere visitarme?  You could add the word for why. The word for why is por qué . Por 
qué.  
S: Por qué.   
T: It's actually the word for because as well . So why don't you want to visit me ?:  
S: ¿Por qué no quiere visitarme?T: Good. ¿Por qu é no quiere visitarme?  The verb for to come  is venir .  
S: Venir.   
T: So of course you could hear  /v/, like I just pronounced for you, so you would get the spelling venir . 
But more commonly you would hear /benir /, /benir /, like a soft b. Firstly,  let's say, do you want to 
come ?:  
S: ¿Quiere venir?   
T: Good. ¿Quiere venir ? And a nice way to remember venir , actually, is conveniente , convenient , 
"with coming", when things come together. Or if you ever heard welcome  in Spanish, you might 
have heard bienvenido  or bienvenida,  bienvenidos, bienvenidas . Literally the same as welcome . 
Well is bien, and come , there we have venidos , a different version of venir . So venir , to come . If 
you want to say the house , it's la casa .  
S: La casa.   
T: What was to?  
S: A.  
T: What is to the house ?  
S: A la casa.   
T: Good. Do you want to come to the house ?:  
S: ¿Quiere venir a la casa?   
T: Good. How'd you say Do you want to come to visit me? Do you want to come to visit me?:   
S: ¿Quiere venir a visitarme?   
T: Good. Don't you want to come to visit me?:   
S: ¿No quiere venir a visitarme?   
T: Good. ¿No quiere venir a visitarme ? What was the word for why?  
S: Por qué.T: Good. Why don't you want to come to visit me?:   
S: ¿Por qué no quiere venir a visitarme?   
T: Very good. ¿Por qué no quiere venir a visitarme?  Good. And of course, here we're using a 
because we have venir . A verb of coming and going, like voy, voy a, venir a , when we're 
connecting to a “to” form. The word for I owe , I owe  in Spanish is debo . Debo.   
S: Debo.   
T: Debo.  The English word debt which is spelled d-e-b-t has this b from debo . It comes from there. 
We don't pronounce it in English, of course. But this word is from Latin and debo  is I owe . The 
useful thing about I owe  is that you can use it like I must . So if you want to say I must continue , 
you say I owe to continue. I owe to continue . And that's the meaning of I must continue . So how 
would you say that: I must continue ?  
S: Debo continuar.   
T: Good. How would you say I must identify it ?  
S: Debo - identif y. Identification.  
T: Good.  
S: Identificación.   
T: Very good.  
S: Identificar.   
T: Very good.  
S: So it's debo identificarlo .  
T: Good. Debo identificarlo.  I must or I owe to identify them. I must identify them:   
S: Debo identificarlos.   
T: Good. Debo i dentificarlos . Or if they were feminine things, what change do you think you would 
see?S: Las.  
T: Good.  
S: Debo identificarlas.   
T: Good.