Track 80  
T: We saw many uses for se, the sound / se/. We have sé as a verb, yo sé , from saber , I know , and this 
sé is written with a written accent sé or yo sé , or we said lo sé is very common, I know it , just 
because sé, sé, sé is a little short, so  you might hear lo sé, lo sé, lo sé, I know it . And then we have 
the grammatical se which we’ve seen as self – himself, herself, themselves, yourself speaking 
formally, itself, oneself . So, for example, you can say he stays , or he remains himself :  
S: Se queda.  
T: Se queda . Good. So, this is the se that we have for him/her/you (formal )/it/themselves . And then 
we also had a se which was when we have two /l/’s together – the first one, the personal one will 
turn into se only because Spanish doesn’t li ke phonetically the sound of having these two /l/’s 
together . So, for example, if you had a verb like to prepare , what is to prepare ?  
S: Preparar .  
T: Preparar . And I prepare :  
S: Preparo .  
T: Preparo . I prepare it :  
S: Lo preparo.  
T: And I prepare  them it , I prepare it for them or I prepare them it :  
S: Se lo preparo.  
T: Se lo preparo . Good, this les turns into se, because we can’t have les lo . So, we’ve seen these uses 
of se so far – the grammatical se for self and then also this phonetic c hange. We have one more 
use for se to see, one more use for se. Now, when we combine se with me, te, le, les, nos, we get 
the meaning of on me in English, in the sense of it died on me , maybe the computer breaks down 
and you say it died on me . So you can s ay it died on me , it ran out on me , so you have this on me 
structure in English, which you can use with only some verbs . Now , in Spanish you can do this as 
well, only it’s much more common and it’s not restricted to just a few verbs. Adding se and the n 
me/te/nos/le/les. So, for example, the door was la puerta , la puerta , and to close was cerrar ,cerrar , so, if you want to say the door closes  you will say the door closes itself , so let’s make that 
first, how would you say that ?  The door closes i tself:  
S: La puerta se cierra.   
T: Good. La puerta se cierra or se cierra la puerta – it’s flexible. Now, if you want to say the door 
closes on me , se me cierra la puerta . So maybe the door keeps closing by itself and you want to 
give that on me  feeling la puerta se me cierra , se me cierra la puerta , either are okay.  
To burn in Spanish is quemar , q-u-e-m-a-r. Quemar .  
S: Quemar .  
T: Quemar . So, if you want to say the dinner burns , the dinner gets burned , what was the dinner or 
to dine ?  
S: Cenar .  
T: Cenar. So, cenar  was to have dinner or to dine , and the dinner , the noun, how was it?  
S: Cena .  
T: La cena . Good. So, it burns itself the dinner, the dinner gets burned :  
S: La cena se quema.  
T: La cena se quema . Now, if you want to say the dinner burns on  me, the dinner is burning on me , 
how would you make that meaning?  
S: La cena se me quema.  
T: La cena se me quema, se me quema la cena . So, you don’t have to worry about using this 
structure for now, until you are really comfortable with all of these lit tle words like me, lo, le, las, 
and se, etc, all of these, but you will hear it, so we are looking at this just briefly now, so it doesn’t 
cause any confusion when you hear it. When you have this extra se, and you know it’s extra, 
because it’s coming wi th me/te/nos/le, it shouldn’t cause any confusion if you hear se me , se nos , 
se te, then you understand what is happening. Acabar , acabar , is to finish or to run out . Acabar .  
S: Acabar .T: Good. A-c-a-b-a-r.  
S: Acabar .  
T: How would you say the battery  runs out, or the battery runs itself out ? The battery  is la batería , 
la batería :  
S: La batería se acaba.  
T: Good. La batería se acaba . If you want to say oh, my battery always runs out , you are talking 
about your phone and your battery is always r unning out, you can say my battery, the battery , like 
we said we don’t use my as much in Spanish as we do in English, the battery always runs out on 
me, the battery always runs out on me , what was the word for always ?  
S: Siempre .  
T: Good, so let’s try this sentence. The battery always runs out on me :  
S: La batería siempre se me acaba.  
T: Very good. La batería siempre se me acaba . How would you ask Does the battery run out on 
you? Speaking informally, Does the battery run out on you? :  
S: ¿La batería s e te acaba?   
T: Good. ¿ La batería se te acaba ? Good. And what if you were speaking formally?  
S: ¿La batería se le acaba ?  
T: Good. ¿ La batería se le acaba ? We use le, because it’s on you , the battery runs out on you , so, 
not using lo, using le – to you, o n you, from you, for you – all included there in le. And if you are 
speaking to more than one person:  
S: La batería se les acaban , no, se les acaba .  
T: Good, very good. La batería se les acaba . Good. So, if you hear this extra se around – you know 
what i t’s doing. Quemar  was to burn , how would you say it burned , it burned ?  
S: Quemó .  
T: Quemó . Now, what if you wanted to say the dinner got burned ?S: La cena se quemó.  
T: Good. La cena se quemó , se quemó la cena , the dinner got burned . Now, how would  you say the 
dinner burned on me, the dinner got burned on me ?  
S: La cena se me quemo - se me quemó .  
T: Good. La cena se me quemó, se me quemó la cena . The dinner burned on us :  
S: La cena se nos quemó .  
T: Good. La cena se nos quemó , very good.