Track 81  
T: How would you say I don't want the door to close on me ? So what was to close ?  
S: Cerrar .  
T: And the door :  
S: La puerta.  
T: La puerta . Which is related to port. Of course, you stress down on the o of port and you get 
puerto . Puerto  is port. And you change the o to an a and you get puerta , door . So, I don't want 
the door to close on me :  
S: No quiero la puerta - Oh. I don't want that the door closes on me.   
T: Exactly.  
S: No quiero que la puerta se me cierre.  
T: Very good. After quiero qu e, no quiero que , we're using the mood tense. No quiero que la puerta 
se me cierre . Or no quiero que se me cierre la puerta . Good. How do you say again , or another 
time?  
S: Otra vez.  
T: Good. I don't want the door to close on me again :  
S: No quiero qu e la puerta se me cierre otra vez.  
T: Good. No quiero que la puerta se me cierre otra vez . What was the verb to return or to come 
back ? And it's related to revolve .  
S: Volver .  
T: Volver . Good. Volver . Instead of saying otra vez , another way of saying again in Spanish is to 
use volver . So, for example, it closes again , we can say vuelve a cerrarse . It returns to close .  
Why do we have a here? Vuelve a cerrarse?  
S: Because it's a verb of movement.T: Good. So how would you say I don't want the door to cl ose again , with volver , how would it be?  
So let's take it from the beginning. I don't want that :  
S: No quiero que.  
T: The door returns :  
S: La puerta vuelva.  
T: Very good. To close itself :  
S: A cerrarse.  
T: Good. No quiero que la puerta vuelva a cerr arse. Or no quiero que vuelva a cerrarse la puerta . 
So volver  a can be used like again , and it's very common in Spanish. You might hear it around. 
So if you say I don't want it to happen again , for to happen you can use to pass . What was to pass ? 
Or if you don't remember, you can make a guess here.  
S: Pasar .  
T: Pasar . Or occur , ocurrir . You can use that as well, for happen . Suceder , succession , suceder . All 
of these mean to happen . Pasar  is probably easier, and easier to remember. So, I don't wa nt it to 
happen again. I don't want it to return to happen :  
S: No quiero que vuelva a pasar.  
T: Good. No quiero que vuelva a pasar . Good. So we saw that we have the mood tense with which 
we are switching the vowel, so we go from vuelve  to vuelva  to get the mood tense. Or we have 
cerrar  and we go from cierra  to cierre  to get the mood tense. We only have mood tense in the 
present and in the past. It doesn't exist in the futures. It used to, and there are a couple of words 
left behind in fixed expressio ns that still have this form. But for all intents and purposes, it doesn't 
exist any more in Spanish, the future mood tense. We have the present, which we've practiced and 
have a very good hold on, and the past mood tense. Now, the past mood tense is very easy to build. 
We will always build it going from the they form of the point in the past. And now that I've 
mentioned the point in the past, I should also mention that the mood tense for the past is the same 
for the line and the point. There are no two dif ferent ones. It counts for both. And we build it goingfrom the point in the past for they. So for example, if we take a verb like to speak , hablar , and 
they spoke :  
S: Is it hablaron ?  
T: Yes, hablaron . So that's the first step to find the mood tense for the past, is to go to the they form 
for the point in the past, hablaron . So you find hablaron  and you change that last o to an a and 
what do you get?  
S: Hablaran .  
T: Hablaran . And that is your mood tense for they in the past. Now from that, we can work b ackwards 
to find the I, he, she, it, you ( formal) version. If we work backwards from hablaran , what would 
we do to work backwards from hablaran , what would we get rid of?  
S: The n, hablara .  
T: Hablara . And then we can make the you (informal) version:  
S: Hablaras .  
T: Good. And we, and the accent won't move.  
S: Habláramos .  
T: Habláramos . Good. So that's your set. We can do the same now with comer . What was they ate , 
the point in the past?  
S: Comieron .  
T: Comieron , good. So now give me the mood tense v ersion of they ate :  
S: Comieran .  
T: Comieran . Good. And I ate, he, she, it, you  (formal) ate:  
S: Comiera .  
T: Good. We:  
S: Comiéramos .T: Comiéramos . And you (informal):  
S: Comieras .  
T: Comieras . So this is how we form our mood tense in th e past. We want to go from the they form. 
So we use this pretty much in the same kind of situations that we use the present mood tense. Just 
in the past, with a couple of situations that are specifically for past. So for example, where quiero 
que necessita tes the mood tense in the present, quería que , I wanted that , will necessitate the 
mood tense in the past. What is I wanted , using the line in the past?  
S: Quería .  
T: So now you could say something like I wanted them to eat with us. I wanted that they at e with us .  
And that they ate of course will be in the mood tense. I wanted that they ate with us :  
S: Quería que comieran con nosotros.  
T: Good. Quería que comieran con nosotros . And as we said, point in the past, line in the past, 
when it comes to the m ood tense, it's the same. I was hoping that he would call me. I was hoping :  
S: Esperaba que.  
T: That he would call me.  So, I was hoping that , we don't say would , we use the past mood tense 
again. I was hoping that he called me :  
S: Esperaba que me llamar a.  
T: Good. Esperaba que me llamara . So whilst in English we would say I was hoping that he would 
call me , in Spanish I was hoping that he called me , and we use the past mood tense.  
Esperaba que me llamara . Good. What was to need or to necessitate ?  
S: Necesitar .  
T: Good. Necesitar . How would you say we needed , using the line in the past? We needed, we were 
needing :  
S: Necesitábamos .T: Good. Necesitábamos . How would you say we needed to speak with him ? We needed to spe ak 
with him :  
S: Necesit ábamos que-  
T: Why que? We needed to speak :  
S: Necesitábamos hablar.  
T: With him :  
S: Con él.  
T: Good. So here we don't need the mood tense. Necesitábamos hablar con él . We needed to spe ak 
with him . But, if you were to say we needed that he speak with us , we needed that he spoke with 
us, then this that, this que is what most of the time in Spanish is alerting you that maybe you want 
to use the mood tense. So, we needed that he speak with us, how is that?  
S: Necesit ábamos que hablara con nosotros.  
T: Very good . Necesit ábamos que hablara con nosotros . Very good. What was to return , and we 
said that we can also use this verb like again ?  
S: Volver .  
T: Volver . So if I wanted to say I called you again , I could just say I returned to call you . It's got 
nothing to do with actually returning, ah? It's just a way of saying again . So what is I returned , 
from to return , from volver :  
S: Volvá .  
T: Go back to comer :  
S: Volví .  
T: Good. So I called you again , speaking informally:  
S: Volví a llamarte.  
T: Good. Volví a llamarte . To organize. In order to organize :S: Para organizar.  
T: Good. So all together, I called you again in order to organize , speaking informally:  
S: Volví a llamarte para organizar.  
T: Good. Volví a llamarte para organizar . So, if we have para organizar , we don't need to worry 
about the mood tense. And we can sometimes adjust our sentence , putting to forms so that we can 
avoid finding the mood ten se. So you could say something like volví a llamarte para organizar , 
volví a llamarte para organizar , I called you again in order to organize , and there you don't need 
the mood tense. But if you were to say I called you again so that, in order that, we org anized , then 
there you would have to use the mood tense. So how would that be? I called you again , informally 
still:  
S: Volví a llamarte.  
T: So that :  
S: Para que.  
T: We organized . So it's the mood tense now, in the past:  
S: Organizaron. Organizaran. O rganizáramos.  
T: Very good. Very good. So you have to take a trip through, ah, to find it. And it's quite time 
consuming at the beginning. But once you start practicing this past mood tense, of course it 
becomes much quicker to find these different forms.  Volví a llamarte para que organizáramos.  
And like I said, you can even avoid the use of the mood tense just by saying volví a llamarte para 
organizar , in a structure like this one, for example. So we're seeing that there are similar structures 
to the stru ctures we practiced the mood tense in the present with, just in the past.