Track 82   
T: We also said that when we use ser or estar , with an adjective plus que - so for example, es 
relevante que , it's relevant that , está bien que , it's okay that - we will f ollow this up with the 
mood tense. So how would you say for example, it's not very relevant that they found it , it's not 
very relevant that they found it , for example ? So how is it's not very relevant :  
S: No es muy relevante.  
T: Good. That they found i t:  
S: Que encontraron, encontraran, lo encontraran .  
T: Good. No es muy relevante que lo encontraran . So here we're not starting with the past, are we? 
No es muy relevante . That's the present. But after que we refer back to the past, so we can use 
the pas t mood tense. In the same way, we could use the present mood tense. We could say it's not 
very relevant that they find it , that they might find it , using the present mood tense. So how would 
that sound?  
S: No es muy relevante que lo encuentren.  
T: Good. No es muy relevante que lo encuentren . Good. How would you say it wasn't very relevant ? 
Now , the line (we can use the line in the past here) from ser is irregular. But, we can remember 
the word era in English, to remember this line in the past from ser. Because a line in the past is an 
era, and if we pronounce era as if it was Spanish, we get:  
S: Era.  
T: Era. And that's the line in the past from ser. So how would you say it was very relevant ?  
S: Era muy relevante.  
T: Good. It was very relevant th at they found it. It was very relevant that they found it:   
S: Era muy relevante que lo encontraran.  
T: Good. So, we want to identify the structures that allow us to use the mood tense, other than to use 
the mood tense correctly, to also avoid it sometime s. No? So imagine you're having a conversationand you just want to get the meaning across and the point across, and maybe you don't want to 
worry in that moment about finding the mood tense. You just have something you need to say, and 
you will worry abou t it later how it would be with the mood tense. So we can play around with the 
structure as we did, for example, with volví a llamarte para organizar . I called you again to 
organize , instead of volví a llamarte para que organizáramos . I called  you again so that we 
organized . Like we did there, we can play around a little bit with the structure to avoid using the 
mood tense. So for example, instead of saying es importante que , we could also say the important 
thing is that . And when we say the im portant thing is that , what we end up with is es que . So, we 
said that we have a useful structure we can use to give this the important thing . So instead of saying 
la cosa importante , which would be a literal translation of the important thing , how could w e 
make that structure using lo?  
S: Just say lo importante ?  
T: Yes, lo importante . Good. So we said that instead of saying literally the important thing , you can 
just use lo. With any adjective, and you get this idea of the important thing . Lo importante , the 
important thing . Lo increíble , the incredible thing . Lo espectacular , the spectacular thing . Es 
que, and then after that es que , you don't need any mood tense. So, incredible  is increíble , slightly 
different in Spanish than in English. We don't have t he d, and we can actually see where incredible 
comes from. To believe in Spanish was creer . And creíble would be believable . And increíble is 
unbelievable . So incredible actually means unbelievable . Increíble .  
S: Increíble .  
T: So first, if we say it's in credible that , then we will want the mood tense. So, it's incredible that they 
come back,  that they return . What was to return ?  
S: Volver .  
T: Volver . Good. So, it's incredible that they return, that they come back :  
S: Es increíble que vuelvan.  
T: Goo d. Es increíble que vuelvan . But, if you wanted to avoid going through that, you could just 
say the incredible thing is that they come back . And there you don't need the mood tense. So, the 
incredible thing :S: Lo increíble.  
T: Is that they return :  
S: Es que vuelven.  
T: Good. Lo increíble es que vuelven . The incredible thing is that they come back . How would you 
say the incredible thing is that they do it again ? And we will use the structure with volver  to say 
again . So, the incredible thing is that the y return to do it . What was to do or to make ?  
S: Hacer .  
T: Good. The incredible thing is that they do it again. The incredible thing is that they return to do it :  
S: Lo increíble es que vuelven a hacerlo.  
T: Very good. Lo increíble es que vuelven a h acerlo . The incredible thing is that they do it again .  
But what if you were to say it is incredible that they do it again ?  
S: Es increíble que vuelvan a hacerlo.  
T: Very good. Es increíble que vuelvan a hacerlo . And how would you say it's incredible t hat they 
did it again ? It's incredible that they returned to do it :  
S: Es increíble que volvieron, volvieran, volvieran a hacerlo.  
T: Good. Es increíble que volvieran a hacerlo . Very good. Well done.