Track 83  
T: What was the word for what or that?  
S: Que.  
T: Que. And what was the word for to buy ?  
S: Comprar .  
T: Comprar . Good. So if we wanted to say something like that you bought it is not my problem , that 
you might have bought it is not my problem , the fact that you bought it is not my pr oblem , we can 
just start with que and put the verb in the mood tense, and we get this feeling. The fact that you 
may have bought it . We're doing the same thing in English - may have - with this may we are 
getting some mood. So, let's start. Speaking inform ally, that you bought it, that you may have 
bought it :  
S: So comprar  becomes compraron , comprara , compraras .  
T: Good.  
S: Que compraras.  
T: Don't forget your it just because you're concentrating so much on the verb.  
S: Que lo compraras.  
T: Is not my p roblem :  
S: No es mi problema.  
T: Good. Que lo compraras no es mi problema . Maybe you want to say something like, that you 
told him is not my problem . So, to tell  we can use decir , to tell or to say, or contar  we saw as well. 
Contar  means to count or to recount . So let's use contar . That you told him , the fact that you told 
him, is not my problem . Speaking informally still:  
S: Que contaras. Que le contaras no es mi problema.  
T: Que le contaras no es mi problema.  Good. In English I should say - although I  have this London 
English so often I don't say - I should say if I were you . Now I was  is the normal past tense, fromto be . I was . So we change was to were  to get the past mood tense in English. If I were you , 
hypothetical past. In Spanish whenever we spe ak about the past hypothetically, after si, after if, we 
will use the mood tense. So for example, what was the verb to be able to , can, related to power ?  
S: Poder .  
T: Poder . Now if you want to make the they form in the past, they could, they were able to , there's a 
slight change. The pod that you would be left with after taking -er away from poder , turns to pud. 
Pud. So how would you say they were able to , using the point in the past?  
S: Pudieron .  
T: Pudieron . Good. So from this base we can form the moo d tense. So if you wanted to say something 
like if I could . If I could cook, I would cook . So, if I could :  
S: Si pudiera.  
T: To cook , or “to kitchen”:  
S: Cocinar .  
T: Good. Si pudiera cocinar , I would cook . So to find would , you must look back at I woul d like. It 
would please me :  
S: Me gustaría.  
T: Good. So, there you have your would . So I would cook :  
S: Cocinaría.  
T: Good. Si pudiera cocinar, cocinaría . How would you say if I could cancel it, I would ? So, if I 
could cancel it, I would cancel it :  
S: Si pudiera cancelarlo.  
T: I would . So I would cancel it :  
S: Lo cancelaría.  
T: Good. Si pudiera cancelarlo, lo cancelaría . Good. What was to have ? The to have  that we use to 
go into the past?S: Haber .  
T: Haber . Now when haber  goes into the point in the past, that first bit hab of haber , when you take 
off your -er, it changes for the point in the past. It becomes hub, h-u-b. So how would you say they 
had using the point in the past, going from haber  and this hab of haber  will become hub when 
we mak e the point in the past:  
S: Hubieron .  
T: Hubieron . Good. So we can say, if you had told me it . So speaking informally, if you had told me 
it, how would you say that? If you had told me it :  
S: Si me lo hubieras contado.  
T: Good. Si me lo hubieras contad o, I would have gone . So if you had told me, if you had told me it, 
I would have gone . So now we need would have.  We leave everything else at the door. So how do 
we get would have  from haber ?  
S: Habería .  
T: Habría .  
S: Habría .  
T: Good. The e falls away. Habría . So I would have gone :  
S: Habría ido.  
T: Good. So al l together. If you had told me it, if you had told me it, I would have gone :  
S: Si me lo hubieras contado, habría ido.  
T: Good. Si me lo hubieras contado, habría ido . If we had known, w e would have gone, if we had 
known, we would have gone :  
S: Si hubiéramos sabido,  
T: We would have gone :  
S: Habríamos ido.T: Good. What is to see ?  
S: Ver.  
T: Ver. And what is they saw , point in the past?  
S: Vieron .  
T: Vieron . What was my house ?  
S: Mi casa.  
T: Mi casa . Your house , informally:  
S: Tu casa.  
T: Tu casa . Do you remember how to say his house, her house, your house (formally), their house ?  
S: Su casa.   
T: Su casa . Good. So how would you say if you saw their house ? If you saw t heir house :  
S: Si vieras su casa.  
T: Good. Si vieras su casa . How would you say if you saw it, you would understand it ? Let's speak 
formally . If you saw it, you would understand it , speaking formally :  
S: Si lo viera, comprendía - comprenderí a.  
T: Good.  
S: Comprendía's  the past, is the tense, isn't it?  
T: The line in the past. Very good. Si lo viera, lo comprendería . Or we can use entender , which 
also means to understand. Si lo viera, lo entendería.  
I should mention that there also exists an alternative form for the past mood tense : the past 
subjunctive, with -ase or -iese. So you may hear hablase  instead of hablara , or entendiese  instead 
of entendiera , comiese  instead of comiera , comiésemos  instead of comiéramos . But how much 
that alternative form is used really depends on the dialect. The main way, the most common way 
of using the past subjunctive is the one that we've learned here. And there's no difference betweenthe two in meaning. They are just two versions of the same te nse. So you don't need to worry about 
using hablase  instead of hablara  for example, but you will need to recognize it if you hear it or 
read it somewhere.