Track 84  
T: So now we really do have the panorama of all times and moods in Spanish. So now that's 
everything. That's every tense including both the idea of time and the idea of mood. We've learned 
how to construct them all, and we should really listen actively to refresh any knowledge that we 
might need to refresh through our exposure to Spanish. Analy zing always what we hear, and if 
you're listening to a song or a movie maybe you just hear the endings of the verbs at the beginning. 
But if you can identify what that ending means, that's the important bit. In the same way this course 
has been focused equ ally on the process that we go through in building our structures in Spanish, 
as it has been focused on content. So half of the point of this course has been content, has been 
teaching you Spanish; and the other half has been how to manage Spanish, how to manage these 
elements that we've learned. How to think about this information and how to relate to information 
generally in a new way. How to find things that you think you might have forgotten. We've also 
looked now and then at some irregularities in Span ish. Verbs or other words that don't follow the 
rules that we learned. Now the older the language, the more irregularities it tends to have. Spanish, 
effectively being modern Latin, is quite prone to irregularities. But the irregularities can be made 
sense  of within themselves. You can group together irregularities. So whilst throughout the course 
we were looking at the odd irregularity as it popped up, now at the end of the course we are going 
to tidy up the irregular verbs. So there are a group of verbs, which we can call the “ go verbs". 
These are the verbs that use -go instead of -o for the I form. For example, how do you say to have, 
to have,  for possession?  
S: Tener .  
T: Tener . And I have :  
S: Tengo .  
T: Tengo . So this -go pops up for the I version, bu t only for the I version. How do you say he has , or 
she has, you (formal) have ?  
S: Tiene .  
T: Tiene . And you (informal):S: Tienes .  
T: And they:  
S: Tienen .  
T: Tienen . And we:  
S: Tenemos .  
T: Tenemos . So the -go is only popping up for the I version.  What was to come ?  
S: Venir .  
T: Venir . Good. I come :  
S: Vengo .  
T: Vengo . So here we have the -go again. But he comes :  
S: Viene .  
T: Viene . They come :  
S: Vienen .  
T: You (informal):  
S: Vienes .  
T: We:  
S: Venemos - venimos.  
T: Venimos . Good. So we have this -go popping up just for the I form. We've seen other verbs like 
this. What was to go out or to leave ?  
S: Salir .  
T: Salir . And I go out or I leave :  
S: Salgo .  
T: Salgo . To put :S: Poner .  
T: Poner . And I put :  
S: Pongo .  
T: Pongo . Good. We h ave decir , to say  or to tell and we get digo, which is even more irregular but 
we see the -go. We have hacer , to make or to do , and we get hago . Oír, which means to hear , oír. 
And we have oigo, I hear . Traer, traer  means to bring . And I bring  is traigo . So, to bring is t-r-
a-e-r, traer , and then I is traigo . It takes an extra i. So here we get traigo . Traer  is interesting 
because traer  means to bring . But when it forms part of another verb, we can translate it like -tract . 
For example, extraer  means:  
S: Extract .  
T: Good. How would you say attract ?  
S: Atraer .  
T: Atraer . Contract :  
S: Contraer .  
T: Distract :  
S: Distraer .  
T: Good. I distract :  
S: Distraigo .  
T: Distraigo . I distract . Or you could say  I get distracted . Me distraigo . Good. So these -go verbs 
are a little bit special and they behave quite irregularly. But more or less in the same way. One of 
the things they do in the same way is that in the mood tense, instead of switching vowels like the 
rest of the verbs do in the mood tense in the presen t, they go from -go to -ga. So whilst in the 
normal present this -go only pops up for I, we have tengo /tiene /tienes /tienen /tenemos , the -ga for 
the mood sense is for everybody. So we get tenga  for I, he/she/it and you formal. How would you 
make it informa l?  
S: Tengas .T: Exactly. So if you were to say I want you to come, I want that you come , speaking informally - so 
I want that :  
S: Quiero que.  
T: Good. Now we want  you come and we want the mood tense version. So it's a -go verb, so our base 
for the mo od tense is venga . So if you want to speak informally and say I want that you come, I 
want you to come :  
S: Quiero que vengas.  
T: Very good. Quiero que vengas . And you will hear actually in Spain venga, venga, venga . They 
use it all the time, meaning come  on, come on . Venga vale . They say vale as well in Spain. Venga 
vale.  You will hear this all the time. When a Spanish person is hanging up the telephone you can 
hear fifteen of them, venga vale , vale venga , venga vale . So this venga  that you will hear arou nd 
a lot will be a nice hook to remember that this -go goes to -ga. Actually, when somebody is 
answering the phone in Spain, you might hear diga or dígame . What does that mean, dígame ?  
S: Tell me .  
T: Yes. The mood tense by itself is an orde r. For a positive order then we have the me after the verb, 
dígame . So you will hear people answering the phone like this in Spain. Tell me . Dígame . So 
traer  was to bring . What is I bring ?  
S: Traigo .  
T: Traigo . And what is you brin g, speaking informally ?  
S: Traigas .  
T: This is the mood tense. But we don't want the mood tense, we just want you bring  informally.  
S: Traes .  
T: Traes . Good. But if you say I want you to bring it , how would you say that? I want you to bring 
it, infor mally:  
S: Quiero que lo traigas.T: Very good. Quiero que lo traigas . I don't want you to distract me,  I don't want you to distract me, 
still informal:  
S: No quiero que me distraigas.  
T: Very good . No quiero que me distraigas . I don't want you to distr act me . Very good.