Track 85  
T: We can identify this group of -go verbs and expect them to go to -ga when they are in the 
subjunctive or the mood tense. So I leave  from salir  is:  
S: Salgo .  
T: Salgo . And if I want to tell somebody leave  (formally):  
S: Salga .  
T: Salga . And if I want to tell more than one person:  
S: Salgan .  
T: Good, and if I want to tell them don't leave :  
S: No salgan ?  
T: No salgan . Good. Poner  was to put . I put:  
S: Pongo .  
T: Pongo , good. Lets speak formally, put it here, pu t it here :  
S: Lo ponga aquí .  
T: And where does that lo go with positive commands?  
S: Póngalo aquí.  
T: Good. Póngalo aquí. But don't put it here :  
S: No lo ponga aquí.  
T: Very good. No lo ponga aquí. We saw with regu lar verbs that we have a shortcut where we don't 
use the mood tense for informal positive commands. So if I want to tell you to eat I can just say 
come , I go to comes  and I drop the s, come . If I want to tell you to find it I can go to encontrar , 
encuen tras, I can drop the s, encuéntralo . That’s our shortcut for informal positive commands 
where we don't use the mood tense. With these -go verbs, to make that shortcut you just drop the 
-go, so for example, how do you say I have from tener ?S: Tengo .  
T: Tengo . If you want to tell somebody informally have , you just drop the -go:  
S: Ten.  
T: Ten. Have it:   
S: Tenlo .  
T: Yes. Tenlo .  
S: So we don't see tenga ?  
T: For formal, but we are now looking at the shortcut that we have for informal, s o how would you 
say have it , speaking formally ?  
S: Téngalo .  
T: Téngalo . But informally we are not using the mood tense, we have a short cut, it's just different to 
the short cut we learnt before, the short cut is just dropping the -go, tenlo. A nice way to remember 
this is how you will see people in many Spanish speaking countries answering the phone, either 
dígame , formally, or dime  informally. What is I come ?  
S: Vengo .  
T: And how do you tell somebody formally to come?  
S: Venga .  
T: Venga . Now how would you make it informal?  
S: Ven.  
T: Ven. Good. So I should mention that the venga  that you hear in Spain as come on  is not necessarily 
formal, it’s lost that feeling of formality because its like a fixed expression, so venga , veng a you 
hear all the time, and then ven will sound much more like come,  physically come,  rather than come 
on; venga , venga , venga is used like come on . What was to leave or to go out ?  
S: Salir .T: Salir . I leave or I go out :  
S: Salgo .  
T: Salgo . Leave , speaking informally:  
S: Sal.  
T: Sal. We can just drop the -go. I say or I tell is digo. If you want to say tell me formally , how is it?  
S: Dígame .  
T: Dígame . If you want to make that same command informally , how will it be?  
S: Dime .  
T: Dime . Good. So both things you hear when people answer the phone in Spain - dime , dígame  - 
and in other countries, in other Spanish speaking countries as well. So for -go verbs they will go 
to -ga to form the mood tense and for the orders , the short  cut for the informal positive order they 
will just drop this -go. So if you want to say tell me when you come , speaking informally, how 
would that be?  
S: Dime cuando vengas.  
T: Good. After cuando  we are using the mood tense because we are referring to t he future. Dime 
cuando vengas . Tell me when you come . How would you say tell me when you do it  - and lets 
speak formally now ? Tell me when you do it , speaking formally:  
S: Dígame cuando lo haga.  
T: Very good. Dígame cuando lo haga . Good.