Track 86  
T: These -go verbs, these verbs that take -go instead of -o for the I version in the present, also behave 
a little bit strangely in the future tenses. In the will and would  tenses. So, we can look at that now, 
and whilst looking at it, re vise the endings that we learned for will and would . So we said that our 
will endings, what we add on to the to form of the verb to get will, are the same as those very 
irregular versions of haber  in the present. So we can make that connection to help us i nternalize 
them. Can you talk me through those will endings?  
S: So it’s -e for I and -emos  for us.  
T: For we, very good.  
S: For we. -a for he, she, it, and you formal , -an for they.  
T: They  or you plural, and the last one, you informal?  
S: -as.  
T: Go od. So we have the endings. And our endings for would , which again we are adding on to the 
to form of the verb, we need to remember one key sound for would . If we remember how to say I 
would like , that’s a nice hook to remember the key sound. So what is th e key sound?  
S: -ía.  
T: -ía. And then on to -ia we can add on, of course, our -mos or -n or -s if we need to. Good. So -go 
verbs, these verbs that have -go and then -ga for the mood tense, when they are building the futures, 
they have a contraction. But , they all make the same contraction. For example, I will have is 
tendré . Tendré .  
S: Tendré .  
T: Tendré . So, of course, it should be “teneré”, but it’s tendré . So that last e of tener  turns into a d, 
and we get tendré . This is a contraction because it mea ns we end up with two syllables instead  of 
three. It would be “teneré”, but it’s tendré . Which just makes everything a little bit more efficient. 
But all of these verbs, these -go verbs, are behaving in a similar way. So we have to come :  
S: Venir .T: Venir. And I will come :  
S: Vendré .  
T: Vendré . Very good. I would come - the same contraction for both futures:  
S: Vendría .  
T: Vendría . Good. I would come. We would come :  
S: Vendríamos .  
T: Vendríamos . We would come later, but we don’t have time. We would  come later, but we don’t 
have time :  
S: Vendríamos  más tarde , pero no tenemos tiempo .  
T: Good. Vendríamos más tarde , pero no tenemos tiempo . What was to put ?  
S: Poner .  
T: And I put :  
S: Pongo .  
T: Pongo . So this -go alerts us to the fact that this ve rb will behave in this irregular way as well. So 
if you want to say I will put it here , how will it be? I will put it here :  
S: Lo pondré aquí .  
T: Good. Lo pondré aquí . I would put it here, I would put it here :  
S: Lo pondría aquí.  
T: Good. We would put it here :  
S: Lo pondríamos aquí.  
T: Good. Lo pondríamos aquí.  And we will put it here :  
S: Lo pondremos aquí.  
T: Good. Lo pondremos aquí . What was to leave or to go out ?S: Salir .  
T: Salir . I leave or I go out :  
S: Salgo .  
T: Salgo. So again this -go can set off our little alarm bell that this verb will probably be irregular in 
the futures. So how would you say I would leave or I would go out ?  
S: Saldría .  
T: Saldría . Good. You would leave or you would go out  (informally):  
S: Saldrías .  
T: Saldrías . Will you leave? Will you go out tonight? Will you go out tonight? :  
S: ¿Saldrías esta noche?  
T: That’s would you , now we want will you :  
S: ¿Saldrás esta noche?  
T: Good. ¿Saldrás esta noche ? But of course we have esta noche which  is future context so we could 
just use the present. We could just say You go out tonight?  We don’t need the future, so how would 
that be?  
S: ¿Sales esta noche?  
T: ¿Sales esta noche ? Good. So for most -go verbs, we take off the -go and we put -dré for I will 
and -dría for I would , in most of them. Traer , to bring, doesn’t do it. Traeré , I will bring . Atraeré , 
I will attract . Distraeré , I will distract . But most of these that have -go will go to -dría or -dré. 
Hacer  and decir , to do or to make or to say or to tell , hacer  and decir  are particularly irregular. 
And we’ve already seen this. We’ve seen how after haber  they become hecho  and dicho . It’s very 
irregular. We saw how the informal command from hacer  is haz, h-a-z. Again irregular, and here 
as well. I will do is haré . So it’s not following this rule. It’s even more irregular. We have haré . 
Haré . I will do or I will make .  
S: Haré .T: H-a-r-e. Haré . And all we need to do is identify one of these irregularities and then we understand 
that all  of will and all of would  will use this same base, the same base that haré  has used.  
So we will do or we will make is:  
S: Haremos .  
T: Good. And we would do or we would make :  
S: Haríamos .  
T: Haríamos . We would do it, but we’re busy now. We would  do it, but we’re busy now : S: 
Lo haríamos , pero estamos -  
T: Occupied .  
S: Ocupados ahora.  
T: Good. Lo haríamos , pero estamos ocupados ahora . We would do it, but we’re busy now . So 
haríamos  is we would do or we would make , and what is we will do or we wi ll make ?  
S: Haremos .  
T: Haremos . And they will do, they will make :  
S: Harán .  
T: Harán . I would say or I would tell is diría . So we get from decir , diría . I would say , he would say , 
she would say , you (formal) would say :  
S: Diría .  
T: So like I said,  we just need one of these versions to understand how the rest will be. So if diría  is 
I would say or I would tell , how is I will say or I will tell ?  
S: Diré.  
T: Diré. I will tell you later  (speaking informally):  
S: Te diré más tarde .T: Good. Te diré más tarde . And of course, having future context with más tarde , we could just 
say:  
S: Te digo más tarde .  
T: Good. Te digo más tarde . I tell you later.  What was to be able to ?  
S: Poder .  
T: Poder . How do you say I would be able to or I could ?  
S: Podría .  
T: Podría . Good. The /e/ falls out. So this is a different irregularity. This is not a -go verb. Podría . 
Of course it was “podería”, but many years of “podería, podería, podería,  podería”, the /e/ fell 
away. Podría . How is to put ?  
S: Poner.  
T: Poner . And I would put :  
S: Pondría .  
T: Pondría . Good. So there’s a subtle difference in sound between I would be able to , podría , and I 
would put , pondría . We would be able to :  
S: Pondríamos .  
T: We would be able to . That’s we would put .  
S: Podríamos .  
T: Podríamos . And we would put :  
S: Pondríamos .  
T: Pondríamos .