Track 88  
T: What was to put ?  
S: Poner .  
T: Poner . I was putting , the line in the past:  
S: Ponía .  
T: Ponía . Good. Now if you want to say I put , the po int in the past, I put  in the past of course in 
English it doesn’t change. I put . Present. I put. Past. I put  for the past, our base is pus-, pus-. P-u-
s.  
So how would you say I put ?  
S: Pusé .  
T: Puse .  
S: Ah, puse .  
T: The endings don’t take the acce nt here for these irregular verbs. Puse . You put , informally:  
S: Pusiste .  
T: Where did you put it? :  
S: ¿Dónde lo pusiste ?  
T: ¿Dónde lo pusiste ? Good. And now we can see where that poner  -pose was coming from. We 
said that when we have poner  as part of a verb in Spanish, it’s -pose in English. Componer , 
compose . Exponer , expose . Oponer , oppose . And now we hear this -pose sound coming out in 
the dot in the past: puse , pusiste . What was to do or to make ?  
S: Hacer .  
T: The base here in this point in the past is hic-. H-i-c. So if you want to say I made or I did :  
S: Hice .  
T: And he made or he did :S: Hizo .  
T: Hizo . Here it would be h-i-z-o. We can’t keep the c, because it would spell “hico”. Hizo . They 
made or you guys made :  
S: Hicieron .  
T: Good. Wh enever you identify one of these irregular verbs in the point in the past where the base 
of the verb has changed, then you know what to do with it. That end -o is coming from -ar and 
then you have -imos , -iste, ieron  from -er/-ir. Sometimes the change is s ubtle. We saw that pod- 
of poder  became pud-. We saw in another lesson that hab- of haber  became hub-. Ven- of venir , 
becomes vin-. So how would you say I came ?  
S: Vine .  
T: And he came :  
S: Vino .  
T: You know how to say wine in Spanish?  
S: Vino .  
T: He came with wine :  
S: Vino con vino.  
T: Vino con vino . Traer , to bring has traje , I brought in the past. So how would you say he brought ?  
S: Trajo .  
T: Good. We brought :  
S: Trajimos .  
T: Trajimos . And I brought again:  
S: Traje .  
T: And traje  also means suit like the kind you wear. And it’s masculine. So I brought a suit would 
be:S: Traje un traje.  
T: Traje un traje. Vino con vino. Traje un traje . There’s one extra irregular past point to look at. 
It’s extra irregular because it doesn’t rea lly follow these rules about what groups it’s taking the 
sounds from , and it’s also extra irregular because it is the past for both ser and ir. It is the past for 
both I was and I went . And this is fui. F-u-i. Fui.  
S: Fui.  
T: Fui. So fui means I was from ser, point in the past, and it also means I went . So ser and ir in the 
point in the past, they share a past. Fui means I was or I went . And fue means he was, she was, it 
was, you were or went. So we see that it’s extremely irregular. Fui. I was or I went . How would 
you say I didn’t go ?  
S: No fui.  
T: No fui.  Fue, he was  or he went . How would you say he didn’t go ?  
S: No fue.  
T: No fue . How would you say we went ?  
S: Fuimos .  
T: Good. And you (informal):  
S: Fuiste .  
T: Fuiste . Now to make they or you (plural) was or went, we would add on -ieron , but we will find it 
very difficult to pronounce “fuieron”, “fuieron”. So the / i/ sound, the i fell away. So how would 
that sound?  
S: Fueron .  
T: Fueron . So the i, the / i/ sound, falls away. Fueron . The sam e thing happens in a couple of other 
cases too. We have trajeron  from traer , to bring . They brought , you guys brought , trajeron . 
Dijeron , they or you guys said . So a couple of other examples there of that i falling away, just for 
sound reasons. “Trajieron” , “dijieron” is kind of difficult to say so it fell away for efficiency: 
dijeron , trajeron , fueron . So now that we have fueron , we can make the past mood tense. Wecan say something like if I were you because we always go from the they form of the point in  the 
past. So if they went or they were is fueron , we can say if I were you and of course we’re using the 
mood tense here because we have if going into the past hypothetically. So this is a mood tense that 
is quite specific for the past. We are not putting  the mood tense after si, after if in the present. But 
for this hypothetical past, if I were you , there we have it in English as well as in Spanish. We said 
that if I were you instead of “if I was you” is mood tense in English. So how would that be? If I 
were you :  
S: Fueron  becomes fueran .  
T: Good.  
S: And the I version is fuera .  
T: Good.  
S: “Si fuera ti”.  
T: Now it’s just the word for you.  
S: Tú.  
T: Tú or usted  depending on who we’re talking to. So si yo fuera tú . Si fuera tú or si yo fuera tú , 
si yo fuera usted , if I were you . Now we are understanding why we went from the they version to 
find the mood tense in the past. Because going from the they version instead of the to form means 
that if there is some irregularity, we will transfer that irregu larity over into the mood tense. So we 
went from fueron  to fuera  and we will go from, for example, dijeron , they spoke , to dijera  so we 
carry over that irregularity of having lost that i. Trajeron , they brought and then trajera  for the 
mood tense. I had was tuve. What was they had or you guys had ?  
S: Tuvieron .  
T: Tuvieron . So now we can say if I had it, I would tell you. If I had it, I would tell you :  
S: Si lo tuviera .T: I would tell you.  You can use contar . Decir  is very irregular for would . So if you don’t want to 
deal with that now,  imagine you’re in a real life context, you can just go to the more regular verb, 
which is contar . I would tell you , informally:  
S: Te contaría .  
T: Good. Si lo tuviera , te contaría , or te lo contaría . I would tell you it . We like to close with this it 
in Spanish a lot. Si lo tuvieria , te lo contaría , I would tell you it . So we have to do or to make 
which is hacer , and we said that the root for the point in the past is hic-. H-i-c for the I version. So 
how woul d you say I made or I did ?  
S: Hice .  
T: Hice . And they did or they made :  
S: Hicieron .  
T: Hicieron . Good. So you could say I wanted for them to do it. I wanted that they did it :  
S: Quería que lo hicieran.  
T: Good. I wanted them to do it. I wanted tha t they do it . Quería que lo hicieran . How would you 
say I wanted for us to do it, I wanted that we do it, that we did it ?  
S: Quería que lo hiciéramos.  
T: Good. Well done. Quería que lo hiciéramos . Good. I’m not as interested here in installing, let’s 
say, all of this content, all of these irregular verbs. All I want to give you is an exposure to how 
they might work. The irregular verbs that you can come across, so that practicing, you can manage 
them. So you should not be afraid of making mistakes. You should build the verbs how you are 
used to and if you suspect that this one might be irregular, check. Check with the person that you 
are speaking to.